The Open Society And Its Enemies
Complete: Volumes I and II
Karl R. Popper
1962
Fifth edition (revised)
1966
ISBN 0-691-01968-1, 0-691-01972-X
Scanner’s note: The text has been spell-checked and checked
for consistency in various ways, but it has not been proofread.
By the same author:
The Logic Of Scientific Discovery
The Poverty Of Historicism
Conjectures And Refutations
It will be seen ... that the Erewhonians are a meek and longsuffering people, easily led by the nose, and quick to offer up
common sense at the shrine of logic, when a philosopher arises
among them who carries them away ... by convincing them that
their existing institutions are not based on the strictest principles of
morality.
—SAMUEL BUTLER.
In my course I have known and, according to my measure,
have co-operated with great men; and I have never yet seen any
plan which has not been mended by the observations of those who
were much inferior in understanding to the person who took the
lead in the business.
—EDMUND BURKE.

Preface To The First Edition
If in this book harsh words are spoken about some of the
greatest among the intellectual leaders of mankind, my motive is
not, I hope, the wish to belittle them. It springs rather from my
conviction that, if our civilization is to survive, we must break with
the habit of deference to great men. Great men may make great
mistakes; and as the book tries to show, some of the greatest
leaders of the past supported the perennial attack on freedom and
reason. Their influence, too rarely challenged, continues to mislead
those on whose defence civilization depends, and to divide them.
The responsibility for this tragic and possibly fatal division
becomes ours if we hesitate to be outspoken in our criticism of
what admittedly is a part of our intellectual heritage. By our
reluctance to criticize some of it, we may help to destroy it all.
The book is a critical introduction to the philosophy of politics
and of history, and an examination of some of the principles of
social reconstruction. Its aim and the line of approach are indicated
in the Introduction. Even where it looks back into the past, its
problems are the problems of our own time; and I have tried hard
to state them as simply as I could, in the hope of clarifying matters
which concern us all.
Although the book presupposes nothing but open-mindedness
in the reader, its object is not so much to popularize the questions
treated as to solve them. In an attempt, however, to serve both of
these purposes, I have confined all matters of more specialized
interest to Notes which have been collected at the end of the book.
1943

Preface To The Second Edition
Although much of what is contained in this book took shape at
an earlier date, the final decision to write it was made in March
1938, on the day I received the news of the invasion of Austria.

The writing extended into 1943; and the fact that most of the book
was written during the grave years when the outcome of the war
was uncertain may help to explain why some of its criticism strikes
me to-day as more emotional and harsher in tone than I could wish.
But it was not the time to mince words—or at least, this was what I
then felt. Neither the war nor any other contemporary event was
explicitly mentioned in the book; but it was an attempt to
understand those events and their background, and some of the
issues which were likely to arise after the war was won. The
expectation that Marxism would become a major problem was the
reason for treating it at some length.
Seen in the darkness of the present world situation, the
criticism of Marxism which it attempts is liable to stand out as the
main point of the book. This view of it is not wholly wrong and
perhaps unavoidable, although the aims of the book are much
wider. Marxism is only an episode—one of the many mistakes we
have made in the perennial and dangerous struggle for building a
better and freer world.
Not unexpectedly, I have been blamed by some for being too
severe in my treatment of Marx, while others contrasted my
leniency towards him with the violence of my attack upon Plato.
But I still feel the need for looking at Plato with highly critical
eyes, just because the general adoration of the ‘divine philosopher’
has a real foundation in his overwhelming intellectual
achievement. Marx, on the other hand, has too often been attacked
on personal and moral grounds, so that here the need is, rather, for
a severe rational criticism of his theories combined with a
sympathetic understanding of their astonishing moral and
intellectual appeal. Rightly or wrongly, I felt that my criticism was
devastating, and that I could therefore afford to search for Marx’s
real contributions, and to give his motives the benefit of the doubt.
In any case, it is obvious that we must try to appreciate the strength
of an opponent if we wish to fight him successfully. (I have added
in 1965 a new note on this subject as Addendum II to my second
volume.)
No book can ever be finished. While working on it we learn
just enough to find it immature the moment we turn away from it.
As to my criticism of Plato and Marx, this inevitable experience
was not more disturbing than usual. But most of my positive
suggestions and, above all, the strong feeling of optimism which
pervades the whole book struck me more and more as naive, as the

years after the war went by. My own voice began to sound to me
as if it came from the distant past—like the voice of one of the
hopeful social reformers of the eighteenth or even the seventeenth
century.
But my mood of depression has passed, largely as the result of
a visit to the United States; and I am now glad that, in revising the
book, I confined myself to the addition of new material and to the
correction of mistakes of matter and style, and that I resisted the
temptation to subdue its tenor. For in spite of the present world
situation I feel as hopeful as I ever did. I see now more clearly than
ever before that even our greatest troubles spring from something
that is as admirable and sound as it is dangerous—from our
impatience to better the lot of our fellows. For these troubles are
the by-products of what is perhaps the greatest of all moral and
spiritual revolutions of history, a movement which began three
centuries ago. It is the longing of uncounted unknown men to free
themselves and their minds from the tutelage of authority and
prejudice. It is their attempt to build up an open society which
rejects the absolute authority of the merely established and the
merely traditional while trying to preserve, to develop, and to
establish traditions, old or new, that measure up to their standards
of freedom, of humaneness, and of rational criticism. It is their
unwillingness to sit back and leave the entire responsibility for
ruling the world to human or superhuman authority, and their
readiness to share the burden of responsibility for avoidable
suffering, and to work for its avoidance. This revolution has
created powers of appalling destructiveness; but they may yet be
conquered.
1950

Acknowledgements
I wish to express my gratitude to all my friends who have made
it possible for me to write this bock. Professor C. G. F. Simkin has
not only helped me with an earlier version, but has given me the
opportunity of clarifying many problems in detailed discussions
over a period of nearly four years. Dr. Margaret Dalziel has
assisted me in the preparation of various drafts and of the final
manuscript. Her untiring help has been invaluable. Dr. H. Larsen’s
interest in the problem of historicism was a great encouragement.
Professor T. K. Ewer has read the manuscript and has made many
suggestions for its improvement.

I am deeply indebted to Professor F. A. von Hayek. Without
his interest and support the book would not have been published.
Professor E. Gombrich has undertaken to see the book through the
press, a burden to which was added the strain of an exacting
correspondence between England and New Zealand. He has been
so helpful that I can hardly say how much I owe to him.
CHRISTCHURCH, N.Z., April 1944.
In preparing the revised edition, I have received great help
from detailed critical annotations to the first edition kindly put at
my disposal by Professor Jacob Viner and by Mr. J. D. Mabbott.
LONDON, August 1951.
In the third edition an Index of Subjects and an Index of
Platonic Passages have been added, both prepared by Dr. J. Agassi.
He has also drawn my attention to a number of mistakes which I
have corrected. I am very grateful for his help. In six places I have
tried to improve and correct quotations from Plato, or references to
his text, in the light of Mr. Richard Robinson’s stimulating and
most welcome criticism (The Philosophical Review, vol. 60) of the
American edition of this book.
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA, May 1957.
Most of the improvements in the fourth edition I owe to Dr.
William W. Hartley and to Mr. Bryan Magee.
PENN, BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, May 1961.
The fifth edition contains some new historical material
(especially on page 312 of volume I and in the Addenda) and also a
brief new Addendum in each volume. Additional material will be
found in my Conjectures and Refutations, especially in the second
edition (1965). Mr. David Miller has discovered, and corrected,
many mistakes.
PENN, BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, July 1965.
K. R. P.

Contents
Preface To The First Edition
Preface To The Second Edition
Acknowledgements
Introduction

Volume I: The Spell Of Plato
The Myth Of Origin And Destiny
Chapter 1: Historicism And The Myth Of Destiny
Chapter 2: Heraclitus
Chapter 3: Plato’s Theory Of Forms Or Ideas
Plato’s Descriptive Sociology
Chapter 4: Change And Rest
Chapter 5: Nature And Convention
Plato’s Political Programme
Chapter 6: Totalitarian Justice
Chapter 7: The Principle Of Leadership
Chapter 8: The Philosopher King
Chapter 9: Aestheticism, Perfectionism, Utopianism
The Background Of Plato’s Attack
Chapter 10: The Open Society And Its Enemies

Volume II: The High Tide of Prophecy
The Rise Of Oracular Philosophy
Chapter 11: The Aristotelian Roots Of Hegelianism
Chapter 12: Hegel And The New Tribalism
Marx’s Method
Chapter 13: Marx’s Sociological Determinism
Chapter 14: The Autonomy Of Sociology
Chapter 15: Economic Historicism
Chapter 16: The Classes
Chapter 17: The Legal And The Social System
Chapter 18: The Coming Of Socialism
Chapter 19: The Social Revolution
Chapter 20: Capitalism And Its Fate
Chapter 21: An Evaluation Of The Prophecy

Chapter 22: The Moral Theory Of Historicism
The Aftermath
Chapter 23: The Sociology Of Knowledge
Chapter 24: Oracular Philosophy And The Revolt Against
Reason
Conclusion
Chapter 25: Has History Any Meaning?
Notes
Addenda to Volume I
I. Plato And Geometry (1957)
II. The Dating Of The Theaetetus (1961)
III. Reply To A Critic (1961)
IV. (1965)
Addenda to Volume II
I. Facts, Standards, And Truth: A Further Criticism Of
Relativism (1961)
II. Note On Schwarzschild’s Book On Marx (1965)
Index Of Names
Index Of Subjects
Index Of Platonic Passages

Introduction
I do not wish to hide the fact that I can only look with
repugnance .. upon the puffed-up pretentiousness of all these
volumes filled with wisdom, such as are fashionable nowadays.
For I am fully satisfied that .. the accepted methods must endlessly
increase these follies and blunders, and that even the complete
annihilation of all these fanciful achievements could not possibly
be as harmful as this fictitious science with its accursed fertility.—
KANT.

This book raises issues which may not be apparent from the
table of contents.
It sketches some of the difficulties faced by our civilization—a
civilization which might be perhaps described as aiming at
humaneness and reasonableness, at equality and freedom; a
civilization which is still in its infancy, as it were, and which
continues to grow in spite of the fact that it has been so often
betrayed by so many of the intellectual leaders of mankind. It
attempts to show that this civilization has not yet fully recovered
from the shock of its birth—the transition from the tribal or ‘closed
society’, with its submission to magical forces, to the ‘open
society’ which sets free the critical powers of man. It attempts to
show that the shock of this transition is one of the factors that have
made possible the rise of those reactionary movements which have
tried, and still try, to overthrow civilization and to return to
tribalism. And it suggests that what we call nowadays
totalitarianism belongs to a tradition which is just as old or just as
young as our civilization itself.
It tries thereby to contribute to our understanding of
totalitarianism, and of the significance of the perennial fight
against it.
It further tries to examine the application of the critical and
rational methods of science to the problems of the open society. It
analyses the principles of democratic social reconstruction, the
principles of what I may term ‘piecemeal social engineering’ in
opposition to ‘Utopian social engineering’ (as explained in Chapter
9). And it tries to clear away some of the obstacles impeding a
rational approach to the problems of social reconstruction. It does
so by criticizing those social philosophies which are responsible
for the widespread prejudice against the possibilities of democratic
reform. The most powerful of these philosophies is one which I

have called historicism. The story of the rise and influence of some
important forms of historicism is one of the main topics of the
book, which might even be described as a collection of marginal
notes on the development of certain historicist philosophies. A few
remarks on the origin of the book will indicate what is meant by
historicism and how it is connected with the other issues
mentioned.
Although I am mainly interested in the methods of physics (and
consequently in certain technical problems which are far removed
from those treated in this book), I have also been interested for
many years in the problem of the somewhat unsatisfactory state of
some of the social sciences and especially of social philosophy.
This, of course, raises the problem of their methods. My interest in
this problem was greatly stimulated by the rise of totalitarianism,
and by the failure of the various social sciences and social
philosophies to make sense of it.
In this connection, one point appeared to me particularly
urgent.
One hears too often the suggestion that some form or other of
totalitarianism is inevitable. Many who because of their
intelligence and training should be held responsible for what they
say, announce that there is no escape from it. They ask us whether
we are really naive enough to believe that democracy can be
permanent; whether we do not see that it is just one of the many
forms of government that come and go in the course of history.
They argue that democracy, in order to fight totalitarianism, is
forced to copy its methods and thus to become totalitarian itself. Or
they assert that our industrial system cannot continue to function
without adopting the methods of collectivist planning, and they
infer from the inevitability of a collectivist economic system that
the adoption of totalitarian forms of social life is also inevitable.
Such arguments may sound plausible enough. But plausibility
is not a reliable guide in such matters. In fact, one should not enter
into a discussion of these specious arguments before having
considered the following question of method: Is it within the power
of any social science to make such sweeping historical prophecies?
Can we expect to get more than the irresponsible reply of the
soothsayer if we ask a man what the future has in store for
mankind? This is a question of the method of the social sciences. It
is clearly more fundamental than any criticism of any particular
argument offered in support of any historical prophecy.

A careful examination of this question has led me to the
conviction that such sweeping historical prophecies are entirely
beyond the scope of scientific method. The future depends on
ourselves, and we do not depend on any historical necessity. There
are, however, influential social philosophies which hold the
opposite view. They claim that everybody tries to use his brains to
predict impending events; that it is certainly legitimate for a
strategist to try to foresee the outcome of a battle; and that the
boundaries between such a prediction and more sweeping
historical prophecies are fluid. They assert that it is the task of
science in general to make predictions, or rather, to improve upon
our everyday predictions, and to put them upon a more secure
basis; and that it is, in particular, the task of the social sciences to
furnish us with long-term historical prophecies. They also believe
that they have discovered laws of history which enable them to
prophesy the course of historical events. The various social
philosophies which raise claims of this kind, I have grouped
together under the name historicism. Elsewhere, in The Poverty of
Historicism, I have tried to argue against these claims, and to show
that in spite of their plausibility they are based on a gross
misunderstanding of the method of science, and especially on the
neglect of the distinction between scientific prediction and
historical prophecy. While engaged in the systematic analysis and
criticism of the claims of historicism, I also tried to collect some
material to illustrate its development. The notes collected for that
purpose became the basis of this book.
The systematic analysis of historicism aims at something like
scientific status. This book does not. Many of the opinions
expressed are personal. What it owes to scientific method is largely
the awareness of its limitations: it does not offer proofs where
nothing can be proved, nor does it pretend to be scientific where it
cannot give more than a personal point of view. It does not try to
replace the old systems of philosophy by a new system. It does not
try to add to all these volumes filled with wisdom, to the
metaphysics of history and destiny, such as are fashionable
nowadays. It rather tries to show that this prophetic wisdom is
harmful, that the metaphysics of history impede the application of
the piecemeal methods of science to the problems of social reform.
And it further tries to show that we may become the makers of our
fate when we have ceased to pose as its prophets. In tracing the
development of historicism, I found that the dangerous habit of

historical prophecy, so widespread among our intellectual leaders,
has various functions. It is always flattering to belong to the inner
circle of the initiated, and to possess the unusual power of
predicting the course of history. Besides, there is a tradition that
intellectual leaders are gifted with such powers, and not to possess
them may lead to loss of caste. The danger, on the other hand, of
their being unmasked as charlatans is very small, since they can
always point out that it is certainly permissible to make less
sweeping predictions; and the boundaries between these and
augury are fluid.
But there are sometimes further and perhaps deeper motives for
holding historicist beliefs. The prophets who prophesy the coming
of a millennium may give expression to a deep-seated feeling of
dissatisfaction; and their dreams may indeed give hope and
encouragement to some who can hardly do without them. But we
must also realize that their influence is liable to prevent us from
facing the daily tasks of social life. And those minor prophets who
announce that certain events, such as a lapse into totalitarianism
(or perhaps into ‘managerialism’), are bound to happen may,
whether they like it or not, be instrumental in bringing these events
about. Their story that democracy is not to last for ever is as true,
and as little to the point, as the assertion that human reason is not
to last for ever, since only democracy provides an institutional
framework that permits reform without violence, and so the use of
reason in political matters. But their story tends to discourage those
who fight totalitarianism; its motive is to support the revolt against
civilization. A further motive, it seems, can be found if we
consider that historicist metaphysics are apt to relieve men from
the strain of their responsibilities. If you know that things are
bound to happen whatever you do, then you may feel free to give
up the fight against them. You may, more especially, give up the
attempt to control those things which most people agree to be
social evils, such as war; or, to mention a smaller but nevertheless
important thing, the tyranny of the petty official.
I do not wish to suggest that historicism must always have such
effects. There are historicists—especially the Marxists—who do
not wish to relieve men from the strain of their responsibilities. On
the other hand, there are some social philosophies which may or
may not be historicistic but which preach the impotence of reason
in social life, and which, by this anti-rationalism, propagate the
attitude: ‘either follow the Leader, the Great Statesman, or become

a Leader yourself; an attitude which for most people must mean
passive submission to the forces, personal or anonymous, that rule
society.
Now it is interesting to see that some of those who denounce
reason, and even blame it for the social evils of our time, do so on
the one hand because they realize the fact that historical prophecy
goes beyond the power of reason, and on the other hand because
they cannot conceive of a social science, or of reason in society,
having another function but that of historical prophecy. In other
words, they are disappointed historicists; they are men who, in
spite of realizing the poverty of historicism, are unaware that they
retain the fundamental historicistic prejudice—the doctrine that the
social sciences, if they are to be of any use at all, must be
prophetic. It is clear that this attitude must lead to a rejection of the
applicability of science or of reason to the problems of social
life—and ultimately, to a doctrine of power, of domination and
submission.
Why do all these social philosophies support the revolt against
civilization? And what is the secret of their popularity? Why do
they attract and seduce so many intellectuals? I am inclined to
think that the reason is that they give expression to a deep-felt
dissatisfaction with a world which does not, and cannot, live up to
our moral ideals and to our dreams of perfection. The tendency of
historicism (and of related views) to support the revolt against
civilization may be due to the fact that historicism itself is, largely,
a reaction against the strain of our civilization and its demand for
personal responsibility.
These last allusions are somewhat vague, but they must suffice
for this introduction. They will later be substantiated by historical
material, especially in the chapter ‘The Open Society and Its
Enemies’. I was tempted to place this chapter at the beginning of
the book; with its topical interest it would certainly have made a
more inviting introduction. But I found that the full weight of this
historical interpretation cannot be felt unless it is preceded by the
material discussed earlier in the book. It seems that one has first to
be disturbed by the similarity between the Platonic theory of
justice and the theory and practice of modern totalitarianism before
one can feel how urgent it is to interpret these matters.

Volume I: The Spell Of Plato
For the Open Society (about 430 B.C.):
Although only a few may originate a policy, we are all able to
judge it.
—PERICLES OF ATHENS.

Against the Open Society (about 80 years later):
The greatest principle of all is that nobody, whether male or
female, should be without a leader. Nor should the mind of
anybody be habituated to letting him do anything at all on his own
initiative; neither out of zeal, nor even playfully. But in war and in
the midst of peace—to his leader he shall direct his eye and follow
him faithfully. And even in the smallest matter he should stand
under leadership. For example, he should get up, or move, or wash,
or take his meals .. only if he has been told to do so. In a word, he
should teach his soul, by long habit, never to dream of acting
independently, and to become utterly incapable of it.
—PLATO OF ATHENS.

The Myth Of Origin And Destiny
Chapter 1: Historicism And The Myth Of Destiny
It is widely believed that a truly scientific or philosophical
attitude towards politics, and a deeper understanding of social life
in general, must be based upon a contemplation and interpretation
of human history. While the ordinary man takes the setting of his
life and the importance of his personal experiences and petty
struggles for granted, it is said that the social scientist or
philosopher has to survey things from a higher plane. He sees the
individual as a pawn, as a somewhat insignificant instrument in the
general development of mankind. And he finds that the really
important actors on the Stage of History are either the Great
Nations and their Great Leaders, or perhaps the Great Classes, or
the Great Ideas. However this may be, he will try to understand the
meaning of the play which is performed on the Historical Stage; he
will try to understand the laws of historical development. If he
succeeds in this, he will, of course, be able to predict future
developments. He might then put politics upon a solid basis, and

give us practical advice by telling us which political actions are
likely to succeed or likely to fail.
This is a brief description of an attitude which I call
historicism. It is an old idea, or rather, a loosely connected set of
ideas which have become, unfortunately, so much a part of our
spiritual atmosphere that they are usually taken for granted, and
hardly ever questioned.
I have tried elsewhere to show that the historicist approach to
the social sciences gives poor results. I have also tried to outline a
method which, I believe, would yield better results.
But if historicism is a faulty method that produces worthless
results, then it may be useful to see how it originated, and how it
succeeded in entrenching itself so successfully. An historical
sketch undertaken with this aim can, at the same time, serve to
analyse the variety of ideas which have gradually accumulated
around the central historicist doctrine—the doctrine that history is
controlled by specific historical or evolutionary laws whose
discovery would enable us to prophesy the destiny of man.
Historicism, which I have so far characterized only in a rather
abstract way, can be well illustrated by one of the simplest and
oldest of its forms, the doctrine of the chosen people. This doctrine
is one of the attempts to make history understandable by a theistic
interpretation, i.e. by recognizing God as the author of the play
performed on the Historical Stage. The theory of the chosen
people, more specifically, assumes that God has chosen one people
to function as the selected instrument of His will, and that this
people will inherit the earth.
In this doctrine, the law of historical development is laid down
by the Will of God. This is the specific difference which
distinguishes the theistic form from other forms of historicism. A
naturalistic historicism, for instance, might treat the developmental
law as a law of nature; a spiritual historicism would treat it as a law
of spiritual development; an economic historicism, again, as a law
of economic development. Theistic historicism shares with these
other forms the doctrine that there are specific historical laws
which can be discovered, and upon which predictions regarding the
future of mankind can be based.
There is no doubt that the doctrine of the chosen people grew
out of the tribal form of social life. Tribalism, i.e. the emphasis on
the supreme importance of the tribe without which the individual is
nothing at all, is an element which we shall find in many forms of

historicist theories. Other forms which are no longer tribalist may
still retain an element of collectivism1; they may still emphasize the
significance of some group or collective—for example, a class—
without which the individual is nothing at all. Another aspect of
the doctrine of the chosen people is the remoteness of what it
proffers as the end of history. For although it may describe this end
with some degree of definiteness, we have to go a long way before
we reach it. And the way is not only long, but winding, leading up
and down, right and left. Accordingly, it will be possible to bring
every conceivable historical event well within the scheme of the
interpretation. No conceivable experience can refute it.2 But to
those who believe in it, it gives certainty regarding the ultimate
outcome of human history.
A criticism of the theistic interpretation of history will be
attempted in the last chapter of this book, where it will also be
shown that some of the greatest Christian thinkers have repudiated
this theory as idolatry. An attack upon this form of historicism
should therefore not be interpreted as an attack upon religion. In
the present chapter, the doctrine of the chosen people serves only
as an illustration. Its value as such can be seen from the fact that its
chief characteristics3 are shared by the two most important modern
versions of historicism, whose analysis will form the major part of
this book—the historical philosophy of racialism or fascism on the
one (the right) hand and the Marxian historical philosophy on the
other (the left). For the chosen people racialism substitutes the
chosen race (of Gobineau’s choice), selected as the instrument of
destiny, ultimately to inherit the earth. Marx’s historical
philosophy substitutes for it the chosen class, the instrument for the
creation of the classless society, and at the same time, the class
destined to inherit the earth. Both theories base their historical
forecasts on an interpretation of history which leads to the
discovery of a law of its development. In the case of racialism, this
is thought of as a kind of natural law; the biological superiority of
the blood of the chosen race explains the course of history, past,
present, and future; it is nothing but the struggle of races for
mastery. In the case of Marx’s philosophy of history, the law is
economic; all history has to be interpreted as a struggle of classes
for economic supremacy. The historicist character of these two
movements makes our investigation topical. We shall return to
them in later parts of this book. Each of them goes back directly to
the philosophy of Hegel. We must, therefore, deal with that

philosophy as well. And since Hegel4 in the main follows certain
ancient philosophers, it will be necessary to discuss the theories of
Heraclitus, Plato and Aristotle, before returning to the more
modern forms of historicism.

Chapter 2: Heraclitus
It is not until Heraclitus that we find in Greece theories which
could be compared in their historicist character with the doctrine of
the chosen people. In Homer’s theistic or rather polytheistic
interpretation, history is the product of divine will. But the
Homeric gods do not lay down general laws for its development.
What Homer tries to stress and to explain is not the unity of
history, but rather its lack of unity. The author of the play on the
Stage of History is not one God; a whole variety of gods dabble in
it. What the Homeric interpretation shares with the Jewish is a
certain vague feeling of destiny, and the idea of powers behind the
scenes. But ultimate destiny, according to Homer, is not disclosed;
unlike its Jewish counterpart, it remains mysterious.
The first Greek to introduce a more markedly historicist
doctrine was Hesiod, who was probably influenced by oriental
sources. He made use of the idea of a general trend or tendency in
historical development. His interpretation of history is pessimistic.
He believes that mankind, in their development down from the
Golden Age, are destined to degenerate, both physically and
morally. The culmination of the various historicist ideas proffered
by the early Greek philosophers came with Plato, who, in an
attempt to interpret the history and social life of the Greek tribes,
and especially of the Athenians, painted a grandiose philosophical
picture of the world. He was strongly influenced in his historicism
by various forerunners, especially by Hesiod; but the most
important influence came from Heraclitus.
Heraclitus was the philosopher who discovered the idea of
change. Down to this time, the Greek philosophers, influenced by
oriental ideas, had viewed the world as a huge edifice of which the
material things were the building material.1 It was the totality of
things—the cosmos (which originally seems to have been an
oriental tent or mantle). The questions which the philosophers
asked themselves were, ‘What stuff is the world made of?’ or
‘How is it constructed, what is its true ground-plan?’. They
considered philosophy, or physics (the two were indistinguishable
for a long time), as the investigation of ‘nature’, i.e. of the original

material out of which this edifice, the world, had been built. As far
as any processes were considered, they were thought of either as
going on within the edifice, or else as constructing or maintaining
it, disturbing and restoring the stability or balance of a structure
which was considered to be fundamentally static. They were cyclic
processes (apart from the processes connected with the origin of
the edifice; the question ‘Who has made it?’ was discussed by the
orientals, by Hesiod, and by others). This very natural approach,
natural even to many of us to-day, was superseded by the genius of
Heraclitus. The view he introduced was that there was no such
edifice, no stable structure, no cosmos. ‘The cosmos, at best, is like
a rubbish heap scattered at random’, is one of his sayings.2 He
visualized the world not as an edifice, but rather as one colossal
process; not as the sum-total of all things, but rather as the, totality
of all events, or changes, or facts. ‘Everything is in flux and
nothing is at rest’, is the motto of his philosophy.
Heraclitus’ discovery influenced the development of Greek
philosophy for a long time. The philosophies of Parmenides,
Democritus, Plato, and Aristotle can. all be appropriately described
as attempts to solve the problems of that changing world which
Heraclitus had discovered. The greatness of this discovery can
hardly be overrated. It has been described as a terrifying one, and
its effect has been compared with that of ‘an earthquake, in which
everything .. seems to sway’3. And I do not doubt that this
discovery was impressed upon Heraclitus by terrifying personal
experiences suffered as a result of the social and political
disturbances of his day. Heraclitus, the first philosopher to deal not
only with ‘nature’ but even more with ethico-political problems,
lived in an age of social revolution. It was in his time that the
Greek tribal aristocracies were beginning to yield to the new force
of democracy.
In order to understand the effect of this revolution, we must
remember the stability and rigidity of social life in a tribal
aristocracy. Social life is determined by social and religious
taboos; everybody has his assigned place within the whole of the
social structure; everyone feels that his place is the proper, the
‘natural’ place, assigned to him by the forces which rule the world;
everyone ‘knows his place’.
According to tradition, Heraclitus’ own place was that of heir
to the royal family of priest kings of Ephesus, but he resigned his
claims in favour of his brother. In spite of his proud refusal to take

part in the political life of his city, he supported the cause of the
aristocrats who tried in vain to stem the rising tide of the new
revolutionary forces. These experiences in the social or political
field are reflected in the remaining fragments of his work.4 ‘The
Ephesians ought to hang themselves man by man, all the adults,
and leave the city to be ruled by infants ...’, is one of his outbursts,
occasioned by the people’s decision to banish Hermodorus, one of
Heraclitus’s aristocratic friends. His interpretation of the people’s
motives is most interesting, for it shows that the stock-in-trade of
anti-democratic argument has not changed much since the earliest
days of democracy. ‘They said: nobody shall be the best among us;
and if someone is outstanding, then let him be so elsewhere, and
among others.’ This hostility towards democracy breaks through
everywhere in the fragments:’.. the mob fill their bellies like the
beasts ... They take the bards and popular belief as their guides,
unaware that the many are bad and that only the few are good ... In
Priene lived Bias, son of Teutames, whose word counts more than
that of other men. (He said: ‘Most men are wicked.’).. The mob
does not care, not even about the things they stumble upon; nor can
they grasp a lesson—though they think they do.’ In the same vein
he says: ‘The law can demand, too, that the will of One Man must
be obeyed.’ Another expression of Heraclitus’ conservative and
anti-democratic outlook is, incidentally, quite acceptable to
democrats in its wording, though probably not in its intention: ‘A
people ought to fight for the laws of the city as if they were its
walls.’
But Heraclitus’ fight for the ancient laws of his city was in
vain, and the transitoriness of all things impressed itself strongly
upon him. His theory of change gives expression to this feeling5:
‘Everything is in flux’, he said; and ‘You cannot step twice into the
same river.’ Disillusioned, he argued against the belief that the
existing social order would remain for ever: ‘We must not act like
children reared with the narrow outlook “As it has been handed
down to us”.’
This emphasis on change, and especially on change in social
life, is an important characteristic not only of Heraclitus’
philosophy but of historicism in general. That things, and even
kings, change, is a truth which needs to be impressed especially
upon those who take their social environment for granted. So much
is to be admitted. But in the Heraclitean philosophy one of the less
commendable characteristics of historicism manifests itself,

namely, an over-emphasis upon change, combined with the
complementary belief in an inexorable and immutable law of
destiny.
In this belief we are confronted with an attitude which,
although at first sight contradictory to the historicist’s
overemphasis upon change, is characteristic of most, if not all,
historicists. We can explain this attitude, perhaps, if we interpret
the historicist’s over-emphasis on change as a symptom of an
effort needed to overcome his unconscious resistance to the idea of
change. This would also explain the emotional tension which leads
so many historicists (even in our day) to stress the novelty of the
unheard-of revelation which they have to make. Such
considerations suggest the possibility that these historicists are
afraid of change, and that they cannot accept the idea of change
without serious inward struggle. It often seems as if they were
trying to comfort themselves for the loss of a stable world by
clinging to the view that change is ruled by an unchanging law. (In
Parmenides and in Plato, we shall even find the theory that the
changing world in which we live is an illusion and that there exists
a more real world which does not change.)
In the case of Heraclitus, the emphasis upon change leads him
to the theory that all material things, whether solid, liquid, or
gaseous, are like flames—that they are processes rather than
things, and that they are all transformations of fire; the apparently
solid earth (which consists of ashes) is only a fire in a state of
transformation, and even liquids (water, the sea) are transformed
fire (and may become fuel, perhaps in the form of oil). ‘The first
transformation of fire is the sea; but of the sea, half is earth, and
half hot air.’6 Thus all the other ‘elements’—earth, water, and
air—are transformed fire: ‘Everything is an exchange for fire, and
fire for everything; just as gold for wares, and wares for gold.’
But having reduced all things to flames, to processes, like
combustion, Heraclitus discerns in the processes a law, a measure,
a reason, a wisdom; and having destroyed the cosmos as an edifice,
and declared it to be a rubbish heap, he re-introduces it as the
destined order of events in the world-process.
Every process in the world, and especially fire itself, develops
according to a definite law, its ‘measure’7. It is an inexorable and
irresistible law, and to this extent it resembles our modern
conception of natural law as well as the conception of historical or
evolutionary laws of modern historicists. But it differs from these

conceptions in so far as it is the decree of reason, enforced by
punishment, just as is the law imposed by the state. This failure to
distinguish between legal laws or norms on the one hand and
natural laws or regularities on the other is characteristic of tribal
tabooism: both kinds of law alike are treated as magical, which
makes a rational criticism of the man-made taboos as
inconceivable as an attempt to improve upon the ultimate wisdom
and reason of the laws or regularities of the natural world: ‘All
events proceed with the necessity of fate ... The sun will not
outstep the measure of his path; or else the goddesses of Fate, the
handmaids of Justice, will know how to find him.’ But the sun
does not only obey the law; the Fire, in the shape of the sun and (as
we shall see) of Zeus’ thunderbolt, watches over the law, and gives
judgement according to it. ‘The sun is the keeper and guardian of
the periods, limiting and judging and heralding and manifesting the
changes and seasons which bring forth all things ... This cosmic
order which is the same for all things has not been created, neither
by gods nor by men; it always was, and is, and will be, an ever
living Fire, flaring up according to measure, and dying down
according to measure ... In its advance, the Fire will seize, judge,
and execute, everything.’
Combined with the historicist idea of a relentless destiny we
frequently find an element of mysticism. A critical analysis of
mysticism will be given in chapter 24. Here I wish only to show
the role of anti-rationalism and mysticism in Heraclitus’
philosophy8: ‘Nature loves to hide’, he writes, and ‘The Lord
whose oracle is at Delphi neither reveals nor conceals, but he
indicates his meaning through hints.’ Heraclitus’ contempt of the
more empirically minded scientists is typical of those who adopt
this attitude: ‘Who knows many things need not have many brains;
for otherwise Hesiod and Pythagoras would have had more, and
also Xenophanes ... Pythagoras is the grandfather of all impostors.’
Along with this scorn of scientists goes the mystical theory of an
intuitive understanding. Heraclitus’ theory of reason takes as its
starting point the fact that, if we are awake, we live in a common
world. We can communicate, control, and check one another; and
herein lies the assurance that we are not victims of illusion. But
this theory is given a second, a symbolic, a mystical meaning. It is
the theory of a mystical intuition which is given to the chosen, to
those who are awake, who have the power to see, hear, and speak:
‘One must not act and talk as if asleep ... Those who are awake

have One common world; those who are asleep, turn to their
private worlds ... They are incapable both of listening and of
talking ... Even if they do hear they are like the deaf. The saying
applies to them: They are present yet they are not present ... One
thing alone is wisdom: to understand the thought which steers
everything through everything.’ The world whose experience is
common to those who are awake is the mystical unity, the oneness
of all things which can be apprehended only by reason: ‘One must
follow what is common to all ... Reason is common to all ... All
becomes One and One becomes All ... The One which alone is
wisdom wishes and does not wish to be called by the name of Zeus
... It is the thunderbolt which steers all things.’
So much for the more general features of the Heraclitean
philosophy of universal change and hidden destiny. From this
philosophy springs a theory of the driving force behind all change;
a theory which exhibits its historicist character by its emphasis
upon the importance of ‘social dynamics’ as opposed to ‘social
statics’. Heraclitus’ dynamics of nature in general and especially of
social life confirms the view that his philosophy was inspired by
the social and political disturbances he had experienced. For he
declares that strife or war is the dynamic as well as the creative
principle of all change, and especially of all differences between
men. And being a typical historicist, he accepts the judgement of
history as a moral one9; for he holds that the outcome of war is
always just10: ‘War is the father and the king of all things. It proves
some to be gods and others to be mere men, turning these into
slaves and the former into masters ... One must know that war is
universal, and that justice—the lawsuit—is strife, and that all
things develop through strife and by necessity.’
But if justice is strife or war; if ‘the goddesses of Fate’ are at
the same time ‘the handmaids of Justice’; if history, or more
precisely, if success, i.e. success in war, is the criterion of merit,
then the standard of merit must itself be ‘in flux’. Heraclitus meets
this problem by his relativism, and by his doctrine of the identity
of opposites. This springs from his theory of change (which
remains the basis of Plato’s and even more of Aristotle’s theory).
A changing thing must give up some property and acquire the
opposite property. It is not so much a thing as a process of
transition from one state to an opposite state, and thereby a
unification of the opposite states11: ‘Cold things become warm and
warm things become cold; what is moist becomes dry and what is

dry becomes moist ... Disease enables us to appreciate health ...
Life and death, being awake and being asleep, youth and old age,
all this is identical; for the one turns into the other and the other
turns into the one ... What struggles with itself becomes committed
to itself: there is a link or harmony due to recoil and tension, as in
the bow or the lyre .. The opposites belong to each other, the best
harmony results from discord, and everything develops by strife ...
The path that leads up and the path that leads down are identical ...
The straight path and the crooked path are one and the same ... For
gods, all things are beautiful and good and just; men, however,
have adopted some things as just, others as unjust ... The good and
the bad are identical.’
But the relativism of values (it might even be described as an
ethical relativism) expressed in the last fragment does not prevent
Heraclitus from developing upon the background of his theory of
the justice of war and the verdict of history a tribalist and romantic
ethic of Fame, Fate, and the superiority of the Great Man, all
strangely similar to some very modern ideas12: ‘Who falls fighting
will be glorified by gods and by men ... The greater the fall the
more glorious the fate ... The best seek one thing above all others:
eternal fame ... One man is worth more than ten thousand, if he is
Great.’
It is surprising to find in these early fragments, dating from
about 500 B.C., so much that is characteristic of modern historicist
and anti-democratic tendencies. But apart from the fact that
Heraclitus was a thinker of unsurpassed power and originality, and
that, in consequence, many of his ideas have (through the medium
of Plato) become part of the main body of philosophic tradition,
the similarity of doctrine can perhaps be explained, to some extent,
by the similarity of social conditions in the relevant periods. It
seems as if historicist ideas easily become prominent in times of
great social change. They appeared when Greek tribal life broke
up, as well as when that of the Jews was shattered by the impact of
the Babylonian conquest13. There can be little doubt, I believe, that
Heraclitus’ philosophy is an expression of a feeling of drift; a
feeling which seems to be a typical reaction to the dissolution of
the ancient tribal forms of social life. In modern Europe, historicist
ideas were revived during the industrial revolution, and especially
through the impact of the political revolutions in America and
France14. It appears to be more than a mere coincidence that Hegel,
who adopted so much of Heraclitus’ thought and passed it on to all

modern historicist movements, was a mouthpiece of the reaction
against the French Revolution.

Chapter 3: Plato’s Theory Of Forms Or Ideas
Plato lived in a period of wars and of political strife which was,
for all we know, even more unsettled than that which had troubled
Heraclitus. While he grew up, the breakdown of the tribal life of
the Greeks had led in Athens, his native city, to a period of
tyranny, and later to the establishment of a democracy which tried
jealously to guard itself against any attempts to reintroduce either a
tyranny or an oligarchy, i.e. a rule of the leading aristocratic
families1. During his youth, democratic Athens was involved in a
deadly war against Sparta, the leading city-state of the
Peloponnese, which had preserved many of the laws and customs
of the ancient tribal aristocracy. The Peloponnesian war lasted,
with an interruption, for twenty-eight years. (In chapter 10, where
the historical background is reviewed in more detail, it will be
shown that the war did not end with the fall of Athens in 404 B.C.,
as is sometimes asserted2.) Plato was born during the war, and he
was about twenty-four when it ended. It brought terrible
epidemics, and, in its last year, famine, the fall of the city of
Athens, civil war, and a rule of terror, usually called the rule of the
Thirty Tyrants; these were led by two of Plato’s uncles, who both
lost their lives in the unsuccessful attempt to uphold their regime
against the democrats. The re-establishment of the democracy and
of peace meant no respite for Plato. His beloved teacher Socrates,
whom he later made the main speaker of most of his dialogues,
was tried and executed. Plato himself seems to have been in
danger; together with other companions of Socrates he left Athens.
Later, on the occasion of his first visit to Sicily, Plato became
entangled in the political intrigues which were spun at the court of
the older Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse, and even after his return to
Athens and the foundation of the Academy, Plato continued, along
with some of his pupils, to take an active and ultimately fateful
part in the conspiracies and revolutions3 that constituted Syracusan
politics.
This brief outline of political events may help to explain why
we find in the work of Plato, as in that of Heraclitus, indications
that he suffered desperately under the political instability and
insecurity of his time. Like Heraclitus, Plato was of royal blood; at
least, the tradition claims that his father’s family traced its descent

from Godrus, the last of the tribal kings of Attica4. Plato was very
proud of his mother’s family which, as he explains in his dialogues
(in the Charmides and the Timaeus), was related to that of Solon,
the lawgiver of Athens. His uncles, Critias and Charmides, the
leading men of the Thirty Tyrants, also belonged to his mother’s
family. With such a family tradition, Plato could be expected to
take a deep interest in public affairs; and indeed, most of his works
fulfil this expectation. He himself relates (if the Seventh Letter is
genuine) that he was5 ‘from the beginning most anxious for
political activity’, but that he was deterred by the stirring
experiences of his youth. ‘Seeing that everything swayed and
shifted aimlessly, I felt giddy and desperate.’ From the feeling that
society, and indeed ‘everything’, was in flux, arose, I believe, the
fundamental impulse of his philosophy as well as of the philosophy
of Heraclitus; and Plato summed up his social experience, exactly
as his historicist predecessor had done, by proffering a law of
historical development. According to this law, which will be more
fully discussed in the next chapter, all social change is corruption
or decay or degeneration.
This fundamental historical law forms, in Plato’s view, part of
a cosmic law—of a law which holds for all created or generated
things. All things in flux, all generated things, are destined to
decay. Plato, like Heraclitus, felt that the forces which are at work
in history are cosmic forces.
It is nearly certain, however, that Plato believed that this law of
degeneration was not the whole story. We have found, in
Heraclitus, a tendency to visualize the laws of development as
cyclic laws; they are conceived after the law which determines the
cyclic succession of the seasons. Similarly we can find, in some of
Plato’s works, the suggestion of a Great Year (its length appears to
be 36,000 ordinary years), with a period of improvement or
generation, presumably corresponding to Spring and Summer, and
one of degeneration and decay, corresponding to Autumn and
Winter. According to one of Plato’s dialogues (the Statesman), a
Golden Age, the age of Cronos—an age in which Cronos himself
rules the world, and in which men spring from the earth—is
followed by our own age, the age of Zeus, an age in which the
world is abandoned by the gods and left to its own resources, and
which consequently is one of increasing corruption. And in the
story of the Statesman there is also a suggestion that, after the
lowest point of complete corruption has been reached, the god will

again take the helm of the cosmic ship, and things will start to
improve.
It is not certain how far Plato believed in the story of the
Statesman. He made it quite clear that he did not believe that all of
it was literally true. On the other hand, there can be little doubt that
he visualized human history in a cosmic setting; that he believed
his own age to be one of deep depravity—possibly of the deepest
that can be reached—and the whole preceding historical period to
be governed by an inherent tendency towards decay, a tendency
shared by both the historical and the cosmical development.6
Whether or not he also believed that this tendency must necessarily
come to an end once the point of extreme depravity has been
reached seems to me uncertain. But he certainly believed that it is
possible for us, by a human, or rather by a superhuman effort, to
break through the fatal historical trend, and to put an end to the
process of decay.
II
Great as the similarities are between Plato and Heraclitus, we
have struck here an important difference. Plato believed that the
law of historical destiny, the law of decay, can be broken by the
moral will of man, supported by the power of human reason.
It is not quite clear how Plato reconciled this view with his
belief in a law of destiny. But there are some indications which
may explain the matter.
Plato believed that the law of degeneration involved moral
degeneration. Political degeneration at any rate depends in his view
mainly upon moral degeneration (and lack of knowledge); and
moral degeneration, in its turn, is due mainly to racial
degeneration. This is the way in which the general cosmic law of
decay manifests itself in the field of human affairs.
It is therefore understandable that the great cosmic turningpoint may coincide with a turning-point in the field of human
affairs—the moral and intellectual field—and that it may,
therefore, appear to us to be brought about by a moral and
intellectual human effort. Plato may well have believed that, just as
the general law of decay did manifest itself in moral decay leading
to political decay, so the advent of the cosmic turning-point would
manifest itself in the coming of a great law-giver whose powers of
reasoning and whose moral will are capable of bringing this period
of political decay to a close. It seems likely that the prophecy, in

the Statesman, of the return of the Golden Age, of a new
millennium, is the expression of such a belief in the form of a
myth. However this may be, he certainly believed in both—in a
general historical tendency towards corruption, and in the
possibility that we may stop further corruption in the political field
by arresting all political change. This, accordingly, is the aim he
strives for.7 He tries to realize it by the establishment of a state
which is free from the evils of all other states because it does not
degenerate, because it does not change. The state which is free
from the evil of change and corruption is the best, the perfect state.
It is the state of the Golden Age which knew no change. It is the
arrested state.
III
In believing in such an ideal state which does not change, Plato
deviates radically from the tenets of historicism which we found in
Heraclitus. But important as this difference is, it gives rise to
further points of similarity between Plato and Heraclitus.
Heraclitus, despite the boldness of his reasoning, seems to have
shrunk from the idea of replacing the cosmos by chaos. He seems
to have comforted himself, we said, for the loss of a stable world
by clinging to the view that change is ruled by an unchanging law.
This tendency to shrink back from the last consequences of
historicism is characteristic of many historicists.
In Plato, this tendency becomes paramount. (He was here
under the influence of the philosophy of Parmenides, the great
critic of Heraclitus.) Heraclitus had generalized his experience of
social flux by extending it to the world of ‘all things’, and Plato, I
have hinted, did the same. But Plato also extended his belief in a
perfect state that does not change to the realm of ‘all things’. He
believed that to every kind of ordinary or decaying thing there
corresponds also a perfect thing that does not decay. This belief in
perfect and unchanging things, usually called the Theory of Forms
or Ideas8, became the central doctrine of his philosophy.
Plato’s belief that it is possible for us to break the iron law of
destiny, and to avoid decay by arresting all change, shows that his
historicist tendencies had definite limitations. An uncompromising
and fully developed historicism would hesitate to admit that man,
by any effort, can alter the laws of historical destiny even after he
has discovered them. It would hold that he cannot work against
them, since all his plans and actions are means by which the

inexorable laws of development realize his historical destiny; just
as Oedipus met his fate because of the prophecy, and the measures
taken by his father for avoiding it, and not in spite of them. In
order to gain a better understanding of this out-and-out historicist
attitude, and to analyse the opposite tendency inherent in Plato’s
belief that he could influence fate, I shall contrast historicism, as
we find it in Plato, with a diametrically opposite approach, also to
be found in Plato, which may be called the attitude of social
engineering9.
IV
The social engineer does not ask any questions about historical
tendencies or the destiny of man. He believes that man is the
master of his own destiny and that, in accordance with our aims,
we can influence or change the history of man just as we have
changed the face of the earth. He does not believe that these ends
are imposed upon us by our historical background or by the trends
of history, but rather that they are chosen, or even created, by
ourselves, just as we create new thoughts or new works of art or
new houses or new machinery. As opposed to the historicist who
believes that intelligent political action is possible only if the future
course of history is first determined, the social engineer believes
that a scientific basis of politics would be a very different thing; it
would consist of the factual information necessary for the
construction or alteration of social institutions, in accordance with
our wishes and aims. Such a science would have to tell us what
steps we must take if we wish, for instance, to avoid depressions,
or else to produce depressions; or if we wish to make the
distribution of wealth more even, or less even. In other words, the
social engineer conceives as the scientific basis of politics
something like a social technology (Plato, as we shall see,
compares it with the scientific background of medicine), as
opposed to the historicist who understands it as a science of
immutable historical tendencies.
From what I have said about the attitude of the social engineer,
it must not be inferred that there are no important differences
within the camp of the social engineers. On the contrary, the
difference between what I call ‘piecemeal social engineering’ and
‘Utopian social engineering’ is one of the main themes of this
book. (Cp. especially chapter 9, where I shall give my reasons for
advocating the former and rejecting the latter.) But for the time

being, I am concerned only with the opposition between
historicism and social engineering. This opposition can perhaps be
further clarified if we consider the attitudes taken up by the
historicist and by the social engineer towards social institutions,
i.e. such things as an insurance company, or a police force, or a
government, or perhaps a grocer’s shop.
The historicist is inclined to look upon social institutions
mainly from the point of view of their history, i.e. their origin, their
development, and their present and future significance. He may
perhaps insist that their origin is due to a definite plan or design
and to the pursuit of definite ends, either human or divine; or he
may assert that they are not designed to serve any clearly
conceived ends, but are rather the immediate expression of certain
instincts and passions; or he may assert that they have once served
as means to definite ends, but that they have lost this character.
The social engineer and technologist, on the other hand, will hardly
take much interest in the origin of institutions, or in the original
intentions of their founders (although there is no reason why he
should not recognize the fact that ‘only a minority of social
institutions are consciously designed, while the vast majority have
just “grown”, as the undesigned results of human actions’10).
Rather, he will put his problem like this. If such and such are our
aims, is this institution well designed and organized to serve them?
As an example we may consider the institution of insurance. The
social engineer or technologist will not worry much about the
question whether insurance originated as a profit-seeking business;
or whether its historical mission is to serve the common weal. But
he may offer a criticism of certain institutions of insurances,
showing, perhaps, how to increase their profits, or, which is a very
different thing, how to increase the benefit they render to the
public; and he will suggest ways in which they could be made
more efficient in serving the one end or the other. As another
example of a social institution, we may consider a police force.
Some historicists may describe it as an instrument for the
protection of freedom and security, others as an instrument of class
rule and oppression. The social engineer or technologist, however,
would perhaps suggest measures that would make it a suitable
instrument for the protection of freedom and security, and he might
also devise measures by which it could be turned into a powerful
weapon of class rule. (In his function as a citizen who pursues
certain ends in which he believes, he may demand that these ends,

and the appropriate measures, should be adopted. But as a
technologist, he would carefully distinguish between the question
of the ends and their choice and questions concerning the facts, i.e.
the social effects of any measure which might be taken11.)
Speaking more generally, we can say that the engineer or the
technologist approaches institutions rationally as means that serve
certain ends, and that as a technologist he judges them wholly
according to their appropriateness, efficiency, simplicity, etc. The
historicist, on the other hand, would rather attempt to find out the
origin and destiny of these institutions in order to assess the ‘true
role’ played by them in the development of history—evaluating
them, for instance, as ‘willed by God’, or as ‘willed by Fate’, or as
‘serving important historical trends’, etc. All this does not mean
that the social engineer or technologist will be committed to the
assertion that institutions are means to ends, or instruments; he
may be well aware of the fact that they are, in many important
respects, very different from mechanical instruments or machines.
He will not forget, for example, that they ‘grow’ in a way which is
similar (although by no means equal) to the growth of organisms,
and that this fact is of great importance for social engineering. He
is not committed to an ‘instrumentalist’ philosophy of social
institutions. (Nobody will say that an orange is an instrument, or a
means to an end; but we often look upon oranges as means to ends,
for example, if we wish to eat them, or, perhaps, to make our living
by selling them.)
The two attitudes, historicism and social engineering, occur
sometimes in typical combinations. The earliest and probably the
most influential example of these is the social and political
philosophy of Plato. It combines, as it were, some fairly obvious
technological elements in the foreground, with a background
dominated by an elaborate display of typically historicist features.
The combination is representative of quite a number of social and
political philosophers who produced what have been later
described as Utopian systems. All these systems recommend some
kind of social engineering, since they demand the adoption of
certain institutional means, though not always very realistic ones,
for the achievement of their ends. But when we proceed to a
consideration of these ends, then we frequently find that they are
determined by historicism. Plato’s political ends, especially,
depend to a considerable extent on his historicist doctrines. First, it
is his aim to escape the Heraclitean flux, manifested in social

revolution and historical decay. Secondly, he believes that this can
be done by establishing a state which is so perfect that it docs not
participate in the general trend of historical development. Thirdly,
he believes that the model or original of his perfect state can be
found in the distant past, in a Golden Age which existed in the
dawn of history; for if the world decays in time, then we must find
increasing perfection the further we go back into the past. The
perfect state is something like the first ancestor, the primogenitor,
of the later states, which are, as it were, the degenerate offspring of
this perfect, or best, or ‘ideal’ state12; an ideal state which is not a
mere phantasm, nor a dream, nor an ‘idea in our mind’, but which
is, in view of its stability, more real than all those decaying
societies which are in flux, and liable to pass away at any moment.
Thus even Plato’s political end, the best state, is largely dependent
on his historicism; and what is true of his philosophy of the state
can be extended, as already indicated, to his general philosophy of
‘all things’, to his Theory of Forms or Ideas.
V
The things in flux, the degenerate and decaying things, are (like
the state) the offspring, the children, as it were, of perfect things.
And like children, they are copies of their original primogenitors.
The father or original of a thing in flux is what Plato calls its
‘Form’ or its ‘Pattern’ or its ‘Idea’. As before, we must insist that
the Form or Idea, in spite of its name, is no ‘idea in our mind’; it is
not a phantasm, nor a dream, but a real thing. It is, indeed, more
real than all the ordinary things which are in flux, and which, in
spite of their apparent solidity, are doomed to decay; for the Form
or Idea is a thing that is perfect, and does not perish.
The Forms or Ideas must not be thought to dwell, like
perishable things, in space and time. They are outside space, and
also outside time (because they are eternal). But they are in contact
with space and time; for since they are the primogenitors or models
of the things which are generated, and which develop and decay in
space and time, they must have been in contact with space, at the
beginning of time. Since they are not with us in our space and
time, they cannot be perceived by our senses, as can the ordinary
changing things which interact with our senses and are therefore
called ‘sensible things’. Those sensible things, which are copies or
children of the ‘same model or original, resemble not only this
original, their Form or Idea, but also one another, as do children of

the same family; and as children are called by the name of their
father, so are the sensible things, which bear the name of their
Forms or Ideas; ‘They are all called after them’, as Aristotle says13.
As a child may look upon his father, seeing in him an ideal, a
unique model, a god-like personification of his own aspiration; the
embodiment of perfection, of wisdom, of stability, glory, and
virtue; the power which created him before his world began; which
now preserves and sustains him; and in ‘virtue’ of which he exists;
so Plato looks upon the Forms or Ideas. The Platonic Idea is the
original and the origin of the thing; it is the rationale of the thing,
the reason of its existence—the stable, sustaining principle in
‘virtue’ of which it exists. It is the virtue of the thing, its ideal, its
perfection.
The comparison between the Form or Idea of a class of
sensible things and the father of a family of children is developed
by Plato in the Timaeus, one of his latest dialogues. It is in close
agreement14 with much of his earlier writing, on which it throws
considerable light. But in the Timaeus, Plato goes one step beyond
his earlier teaching when he represents the contact of the Form or
Idea with the world of space and time by an extension of his
simile. He describes the abstract ‘space’ in which the sensible
things move (originally the space or gap between heaven and
earth) as a receptacle, and compares it with the mother of things, in
which at the beginning of time the sensible things are created by
the Forms which stamp or impress themselves upon pure space,
and thereby give the offspring their shape. ‘We must conceive’,
writes Plato, ‘three kinds of things: first, those which undergo
generation; secondly, that in which generation takes place; and
thirdly, the model in whose likeness the generated things are born.
And we may compare the receiving principle to a mother, and the
model to a father, and their product to a child.’ And he goes on to
describe first more fully the models—the fathers, the unchanging
Forms or Ideas: ‘There is first the unchanging Form which is
uncreated and indestructible,.. invisible and imperceptible by any
sense, and which can be contemplated only by pure thought.’ To
any single one of these Forms or Ideas belongs its offspring or race
of sensible things, ‘another kind of things, bearing the name of
their Form and resembling it, but perceptible to sense, created,
always in flux, generated in a place and again vanishing from that
place, and apprehended by opinion based upon perception’. And
the abstract space, which is likened to the mother, is described

thus: ‘There is a third kind, which is space, and is eternal, and
cannot be destroyed, and which provides a home for all generated
things ...’15
It may contribute to the understanding of Plato’s theory of
Forms or Ideas if we compare it with certain Greek religious
beliefs. As in many primitive religions, some at least of the Greek
gods are nothing but idealized tribal primogenitors and heroes—
personifications of the ‘virtue’ or ‘perfection’ of the tribe.
Accordingly, certain tribes and families traced their ancestry to one
or other of the gods. (Plato’s own family is reported to have traced
its descent from the god Poseidon16.) We have only to consider that
these gods are immortal or eternal, and perfect—or very nearly
so—while ordinary men are involved in the flux of all things, and
subject to decay (which indeed is the ultimate destiny of every
human individual), in order to see that these gods are related to
ordinary men in the same way as Plato’s Forms or Ideas are related
to those sensible things which are their copies17 (or his perfect state
to the various states now existing). There is, however, an important
difference between Greek mythology and Plato’s Theory of Forms
or Ideas. While the Greeks venerated many gods as the ancestors
of various tribes or families, the Theory of Ideas demands that
there should be only one Form or Idea of man18; for it is one of the
central doctrines of the Theory of Forms that there is only one
Form of every ‘race’ or ‘kind’ of things. The uniqueness of the
Form which corresponds to the uniqueness of the primogenitor is a
necessary element of the theory if it is to perform one of its most
important functions, namely, to explain the similarity of sensible
things, by proposing that the similar things are copies or imprints
of one Form. Thus if there were two equal or similar Forms, their
similarity would force us to assume that both are copies of a third
original which thereby would turn out to be the only true and
single Form. Or, as Plato puts it in the Timaeus: ‘The resemblance
would thus be explained, more precisely, not as one between these
two things, but in reference to that superior thing which is their
prototype.’19 In the Republic, which is earlier than the Timaeus,
Plato had explained his point even more clearly, using as his
example the ‘essential bed’, i.e. the Form or Idea of a bed: ‘God ..
has made one essential bed, and only one; two or more he did not
produce, and never will ... For .. even if God were to make two,
and no more, then another would be brought to light, namely the

Form exhibited by those two; this, and not those two, would then
be the essential bed.’20
This argument shows that the Forms or Ideas provide Plato not
only with an origin or starting point for all developments in space
and time (and especially for human history) but also with an
explanation of the similarities between sensible things of the same
kind. If things are similar because of some virtue or property which
they share, for instance, whiteness, or hardness, or goodness, then
this virtue or property must be one and the same in all of them;
otherwise it would not make them similar. According to Plato, they
all participate in the one Form or Idea of whiteness, if they are
white; of hardness, if they are hard. They participate in the sense in
which children participate in their father’s possessions and gifts;
just as the many particular reproductions of an etching which are
all impressions from one and the same plate, and hence similar to
one another, may participate in the beauty of the original.
The fact that this theory is designed to explain the similarities
in sensible things does not seem at first sight to be in any way
connected with historicism. But it is; and as Aristotle tells us, it
was just this connection which induced Plato to develop the
Theory of Ideas. I shall attempt to give an outline of this
development, using Aristotle’s account together with some
indications in Plato’s own writings.
If all things are in continuous flux, then it is impossible to say
anything definite about them. We can have no real knowledge of
them, but, at the best, vague and delusive ‘opinions’. This point, as
we know from Plato and Aristotle21, worried many followers of
Heraclitus. Parmenides, one of Plato’s predecessors who
influenced him greatly, had taught that the pure knowledge of
reason, as opposed to the delusive opinion of experience, could
have as its object only a world which did not change, and that the
pure knowledge of reason did in fact reveal such a world. But the
unchanging and undivided reality which Parmenides thought he
had discovered behind the world of perishable things22 was entirely
unrelated to this world in which we live and die. It was therefore
incapable of explaining it.
With this, Plato could not be satisfied. Much as he disliked and
despised this empirical world of flux, he was, at bottom, most
deeply interested in it. He wanted to unveil the secret of its decay,
of its violent changes, and of its unhappiness. He hoped to discover
the means of its salvation. He was deeply impressed by

Parmenides’ doctrine of an unchanging, real, solid, and perfect
world behind this ghostly world in which he suffered; but this
conception did not solve his problems as long as it remained
unrelated to the world of sensible things. What he was looking for
was knowledge, not opinion; the pure rational knowledge of a
world that does not change; but, at the same time, knowledge that
could be used to investigate this changing world, and especially,
this changing society; political change, with its strange historical
laws. Plato aimed at discovering the secret of the royal knowledge
of politics, of the art of ruling men.
But an exact science of politics seemed as impossible as any
exact knowledge of a world in flux; there were no fixed objects in
the political field. How could one discuss any political questions
when the meaning of words like ‘government’ or ‘state’ or ‘city’
changed with every new phase in the historical development?
Political theory must have seemed to Plato in his Heraclitean
period to be just as elusive, fluctuating, and unfathomable as
political practice.
In this situation Plato obtained, as Aristotle tells us, a most
important hint from Socrates. Socrates was interested in ethical
matters; he was an ethical reformer, a moralist who pestered all
kinds of people, forcing them to think, to explain, and to account
for the principles of their actions. He used to question them and
was not easily satisfied by their answers. The typical reply which
he received—that we act in a certain way because it is ‘wise’ to act
in this way or perhaps ‘efficient’, or ‘just’, or ‘pious’, etc.—only
incited him to continue his questions by asking what is wisdom; or
efficiency; or justice; or piety. In other words, he was led to
enquire into the ‘virtue’ of a thing. So he discussed, for instance,
the wisdom displayed in various trades and professions, in order to
find out what is common to all these various and changing ‘wise’
ways of behaviour, and so to find out what wisdom really is, or
what ‘wisdom’ really means, or (using Aristotle’s way of putting
it) what its essence is. ‘It was natural’, says Aristotle, ‘that
Socrates should search for the essence’23, i.e. for the virtue or
rationale of a thing and for the real, the unchanging or essential
meanings of the terms. ‘In this connection he became the first to
raise the problem of universal definitions.’
These attempts of Socrates to discuss ethical terms like
‘justice’ or ‘modesty’ or ‘piety’ have been rightly compared with
modern discussions on Liberty (by Mill24, for instance), or on

Authority, or on the Individual and Society (by Catlin, for
instance). There is no need to assume that Socrates, in his search
for the unchanging or essential meaning of such terms, personified
them, or that he treated them like things. Aristotle’s report at least
suggests that he did not, and that it was Plato who developed
Socrates’ method of searching for the meaning or essence into a
method of determining the real nature, the Form or Idea of a thing.
Plato retained ‘the Heraclitean doctrines that all sensible things are
ever in a state of flux, and that there is no knowledge about them’,
but he found in Socrates’ method a way out of these difficulties.
Though there ‘could be no definition of any sensible thing, as they
were always changing’, there could be definitions and true
knowledge of things of a different kind—of the virtues of the
sensible things. ‘If knowledge or thought were to have an object,
there would have to be some different, some unchanging entities,
apart from those which are sensible’, says Aristotle25, and he
reports of Plato that ‘things of this other sort, then, he called Forms
or Ideas, and the sensible things, he said, were distinct from them,
and all called after them. And the many things which have the
same name as a certain Form or Idea exist by participating in it’.
This account of Aristotle’s corresponds closely to Plato’s own
arguments proffered in the Timaeus26, and it shows that Plato’s
fundamental problem was to find a scientific method of dealing
with sensible things. He wanted to obtain purely rational
knowledge, and not merely opinion; and since pure knowledge of
sensible things could not be obtained, he insisted, as mentioned
before, on obtaining at least such pure knowledge as was in some
way related, and applicable, to sensible things. Knowledge of the
Forms or Ideas fulfilled this demand, since the Form was related to
its sensible things like a father to his children who are under age.
The Form was the accountable representative of the sensible
things, and could therefore be consulted in important questions
concerning the world of flux.
According to our analysis, the theory of Forms or Ideas has at
least three different functions in Plato’s philosophy, (1) It is a most
important methodological device, for it makes possible pure
scientific knowledge, and even knowledge which could be applied
to the world of changing things of which we cannot immediately
obtain any knowledge, but only opinion. Thus it becomes possible
to enquire into the problems of a changing society, and to build up
a political science. (2) It provides the clue to the urgently needed

theory of change, and of decay, to a theory of generation and
degeneration, and especially, the clue to history. (3) It opens a
way, in the social realm, towards some kind of social engineering;
and it makes possible the forging of instruments for arresting social
change, since it suggests designing a ‘best state’ which so closely
resembles the Form or Idea of a state that it cannot decay.
Problem (2), the theory of change and of history, will be dealt
with in the next two chapters, 4 and 5, where Plato’s descriptive
sociology is treated, i.e. his description and explanation of the
changing social world in which he lived. Problem (3), the arresting
of social change, will be dealt with in chapters 6 to 9, treating
Plato’s political programme. Problem (1), that of Plato’s
methodology, has with the help of Aristotle’s account of the
history of Plato’s theory been briefly outlined in the present
chapter. To this discussion, I wish to add here a few more remarks.
VI
I use the name methodological essentialism to characterize the
view, held by Plato and many of his followers, that it is the task of
pure knowledge or ‘science’ to discover and to describe the true
nature of things, i.e. their hidden reality or essence. It was Plato’s
peculiar belief that the essence of sensible things can be found in
other and more real things—in their primogenitors or Forms. Many
of the later methodological essentialists, for instance Aristotle, did
not altogether follow him in this; but they all agreed with him in
determining the task of pure knowledge as the discovery of the
hidden nature or Form or essence of things. All these
methodological essentialists also agreed with Plato in holding that
these essences may be discovered and discerned with the help of
intellectual intuition; that every essence has a name proper to it, the
name after which the sensible things are called; and that it may be
described in words. And a description of the essence of a thing
they all called a ‘definition’. According to methodological
essentialism, there can be three ways of knowing a thing: ‘I mean
that we can know its unchanging reality or essence; and that we
can know the definition of the essence; and that we can know its
name. Accordingly, two questions may be formulated about any
real thing ...: A person may give the name and ask for the
definition; or he may give the definition and ask for the name.’ As
an example of this method, Plato uses the essence of ‘even’ (as
opposed to ‘odd’): ‘Number .. may be a thing capable of division

into equal parts. If it is so divisible, number is named “even”; and
the definition of the name “even” is “a number divisible into equal
parts”... And when we are given the name and asked about the
definition, or when we are given the definition and asked about the
name, we speak, in both cases, of one and the same essence,
whether we call it now “even” or “a number divisible into equal
parts”.’ After this example, Plato proceeds to apply this method to
a ‘proof’ concerning the real nature of the soul, about which we
shall hear more later27.
Methodological essentialism, i.e. the theory that it is the aim of
science to reveal essences and to describe them by means of
definitions, can be better understood when contrasted with its
opposite, methodological nominalism. Instead of aiming at finding
out what a thing really is, and at defining its true nature,
methodological nominalism aims at describing how a thing
behaves in various circumstances, and especially, whether there are
any regularities in its behaviour. In other words, methodological
nominalism sees the aim of science in the description of the things
and events of our experience, and in an ‘explanation’ of these
events, i.e. their description with the help of universal laws28. And
it sees in our language, and especially in those of its rules which
distinguish properly constructed sentences and inferences from a
mere heap of words, the great instrument of scientific
description29; words it considers rather as subsidiary tools for this
task, and not as names of essences. The methodological nominalist
will never think that a question like ‘What is energy?’ or ‘What is
movement?’ or ‘What is an atom?’ is an important question for
physics; but he will attach importance to a question like: ‘How can
the energy of the sun be made useful?’ or ‘How does a planet
move?’ or ‘Under what condition does an atom radiate light?’ And
to those philosophers who tell him that before having answered the
‘what is’ question he cannot hope to give exact answers to any of
the ‘how’ questions, he will reply, if at all, by pointing out that he
much prefers that modest degree of exactness which he can
achieve by his methods to the pretentious muddle which they have
achieved by theirs.
As indicated by our example, methodological nominalism is
nowadays fairly generally accepted in the natural sciences. The
problems of the social sciences, on the other hand, are still for the
most part treated by essentialist methods. This is, in my opinion,
one of the main reasons for their backwardness. But many who

have noticed this situation30 judge it differently. They believe that
the difference in method is necessary, and that it reflects an
‘essential’ difference between the ‘natures’ of these two fields of
research.
The arguments usually offered in support of this view
emphasize the importance of change in society, and exhibit other
aspects of historicism. The physicist, so runs a typical argument,
deals with objects like energy or atoms which, though changing,
retain a certain degree of constancy. He can describe the changes
encountered by these relatively unchanging entities, and does not
have to construct or detect essences or Forms or similar
unchanging entities in order to obtain something permanent on
which he can make definite pronouncements. The social scientist,
however, is in a very different position. His whole field of interest
is changing. There are no permanent entities in the social realm,
where everything is under the sway of historical flux. How, for
instance, can we study government? How could we identify it in
the diversity of governmental institutions, found in different states
at different historical periods, without assuming that they have
something essentially in common? We call an institution a
government if we think that it is essentially a government, i.e. if it
complies with our intuition of what a government is, an intuition
which we can formulate in a definition. The same would hold good
for other sociological entities, such as ‘civilization’. We must
grasp their essence, so the historicist argument concludes, and lay
it down in the form of a definition.
These modern arguments are, I think, very similar to those
reported above which, according to Aristotle, led Plato to his
doctrine of Forms or Ideas. The only difference is that Plato (who
did not accept the atomic theory and knew nothing about energy)
applied his doctrine to the realm of physics also, and thus to the
world as a whole. We have here an indication of the fact that, in
the social sciences, a discussion of Plato’s methods may be topical
even to-day.
Before proceeding to Plato’s sociology and to the use he made
of his methodological essentialism in that field, I wish to make it
quite clear that I am confining my treatment of Plato to his
historicism, and to his ‘best state’. I must therefore warn the reader
not to expect a representation of the whole of Plato’s philosophy,
or what may be called a ‘fair and just’ treatment of Platonism. My
attitude towards historicism is one of frank hostility, based upon

the conviction that historicism is futile, and worse than that. My
survey of the historicist features of Platonism is therefore strongly
critical. Although I admire much in Plato’s philosophy, far beyond
those parts which I believe to be Socratic, I do not take it as my
task to add to the countless tributes to his genius. I am, rather, bent
on destroying what is in my opinion mischievous in this
philosophy. It is the totalitarian tendency of Plato’s political
philosophy which I shall try to analyse, and to criticize.31

Plato’s Descriptive Sociology
Chapter 4: Change And Rest
Plato was one of the first social scientists and undoubtedly by
far the most influential. In the sense in which the term ‘sociology’
was understood by Comte, Mill, and Spencer, he was a sociologist;
that is to say, he successfully applied his idealist method to an
analysis of the social life of man, and of the laws of its
development as well as the laws and conditions of its stability. In
spite of Plato’s great influence, this side of his teaching has been
little noticed. This seems to be due to two factors. First of all,
much of Plato’s sociology is presented by him in such close
connection with his ethical and political demands that the
descriptive elements have been largely overlooked. Secondly,
many of his thoughts were taken so much for granted that they
were simply absorbed unconsciously and therefore uncritically. It
is mainly in this way that his sociological theories became so
influential.
Plato’s sociology is an ingenious blend of speculation with
acute observation of facts. Its speculative setting is, of course, the
theory of Forms and of universal flux and decay, of generation and
degeneration. But on this idealist foundation Plato constructs an
astonishingly realistic theory of society, capable of explaining the
main trends in the historical development of the Greek city-states
as well as the social and political forces at work in his own day.
I
The speculative or metaphysical setting of Plato’s theory of
social change has already been sketched. It is the world of
unchanging Forms or Ideas, of which the world of changing things
in space and time is the offspring. The Forms or Ideas are not only

unchanging, indestructible, and incorruptible, but also perfect, true,
real, and good; in fact, ‘good’ is once, in the Republic1, explained
as ‘everything that preserves’, and ‘evil’ as ‘everything that
destroys or corrupts’. The perfect and good Forms or Ideas are
prior to the copies, the sensible things, and they are something like
primogenitors or starting points2 of all the changes in the world of
flux. This view is used for evaluating the general trend and main
direction of all changes in the world of sensible things. For if the
starting point of all change is perfect and good, then change can
only be a movement that leads away from the perfect and good; it
must be directed towards the imperfect and the evil, towards
corruption.
This theory can be developed in detail. The more closely a
sensible thing resembles its Form or Idea, the less corruptible it
must be, since the Forms themselves are incorruptible. But sensible
or generated things are not perfect copies; indeed, no copy can be
perfect, since it is only an imitation of the true reality, only
appearance and illusion, not the truth. Accordingly, no sensible
things (except perhaps the most excellent ones) resemble their
Forms sufficiently closely to be unchangeable. ‘Absolute and
eternal immutability is assigned only to the most divine of all
things, and bodies do not belong to this order’3, says Plato. A
sensible or generated thing—such as a physical body, or a human
soul—if it is a good copy, may change only very little at first; and
the most ancient change or motion—the motion of the soul—is still
‘divine’ (as opposed to secondary and tertiary changes). But every
change, however small, must make it different, and thus less
perfect, by reducing its resemblance to its Form. In this way, the
thing becomes more changeable with every change, and more
corruptible, since it becomes further removed from its Form which
is its ‘cause of immobility and of being at rest’, as Aristotle says,
who paraphrases Plato’s doctrine as follows: ‘Things are generated
by participating in the Form, and they decay by losing the Form.’
This process of degeneration, slow at first and more rapid
afterwards—this law of decline and fall—is dramatically described
by Plato in the Laws, the last of his great dialogues. The passage
deals primarily with the destiny of the human soul, but Plato makes
it clear that it holds for all things that ‘share in soul’, by which he
means all living things. ‘All things that share in soul change’, he
writes, ‘.. and while they change, they are carried along by the
order and law of destiny. The smaller the change in their character,

the less significant is the beginning decline in their level of rank.
But when the change increases, and with it the iniquity, then they
fall—down into the abyss and what is known as the infernal
regions.’ (In the continuation of the passage, Plato mentions the
possibility that ‘a soul gifted with an exceptionally large share of
virtue can, by force of its own will .., if it is in communion with the
divine virtue, become supremely virtuous and move to an exalted
region’. The problem of the exceptional soul which can save
itself—and perhaps others—from the general law of destiny will
be discussed in chapter 8.) Earlier in the Laws, Plato summarizes
his doctrine of change: ‘Any change whatever, except the change
of an evil thing, is the gravest of all the treacherous dangers that
can befall a thing—whether it is now a change of season, or of
wind, or of the diet of the body, or of the character of the soul.’
And he adds, for the sake of emphasis: ‘This statement applies to
everything, with the sole exception, as I said just now, of
something evil.’ In brief, Plato teaches that change is evil, and that
rest is divine.
We see now that Plato’s theory of Forms or Ideas implies a
certain trend in the development of the world in flux. It leads to the
law that the corruptibility of all things in that world must
continually increase. It is not so much a rigid law of universally
increasing corruption, but rather a law of increasing corruptibility;
that is to say, the danger or the likelihood of corruption increases,
but exceptional developments in the other direction are not
excluded. Thus it is possible, as the last quotations indicate, that a
very good soul may defy change and decay, and that a very evil
thing, for instance a very evil city, may be improved by changing
it. (In order that such an improvement should be of any value, we
would have to try to make it permanent, i.e. to arrest all further
change.)
In full accordance with this general theory is Plato’s story, in
the Timaeus, of the origin of species. According to this story, man,
the highest of animals, is generated by the gods; the other species
originate from him by a process of corruption and degeneration.
First, certain men—the cowards and villains—degenerate into
women. Those who are lacking wisdom degenerate step by step
into the lower animals. Birds, we hear, came into being through the
transformation of harmless but too easy-going people who would
trust their senses too much; ‘land animals came from men who had
no interest in philosophy’; and fishes, including shell-fish,

‘degenerated from the most foolish, stupid, and .. unworthy’ of all
men4.
It is clear that this theory can be applied to human society, and
to its history. It then explains Hesiod’s5 pessimistic law of
development, the law of historical decay. If we are to believe
Aristotle’s report (outlined in the last chapter), then the theory of
Forms or Ideas was originally introduced in order to meet a
methodological demand, the demand for pure or rational
knowledge which is impossible in the case of sensible things in
flux. We now see that the theory does more than that. Over and
above meeting these methodological demands, it provides a theory
of change. It explains the general direction of the flux of all
sensible things, and thereby the historical tendency to degenerate
shown by man and human society. (And it does still more; as we
shall see in chapter 6, the theory of Forms determines the trend of
Plato’s political demands also, and even the means for their
realization.) If, as I believe, the philosophies of Plato as well as
Heraclitus sprang from their social experience, especially from the
experience of class war and from the abject feeling that their social
world was going to pieces, then we can understand why the theory
of Forms came to play such an important part in Plato’s philosophy
when he found that it was capable of explaining the trend towards
degeneration. He must have welcomed it as the solution of a most
mystifying riddle. While Heraclitus had been unable to pass a
direct ethical condemnation upon the trend of the political
development, Plato found, in his theory of Forms, the theoretical
basis for a pessimistic judgement in Hesiod’s vein.
But Plato’s greatness as a sociologist does not lie in his general
and abstract speculations about the law of social decay. It lies
rather in the wealth and detail of his observations, and in the
amazing acuteness of his sociological intuition. He saw things
which had not been seen before him, and which were rediscovered
only in our own time. As an example I may mention his theory of
the primitive beginnings of society, of tribal patriarchy, and, in
general, his attempt to outline the typical periods in the
development of social life. Another example is Plato’s sociological
and economic historicism, his emphasis upon the economic
background of the political life and the historical development; a
theory revived by Marx under the name ‘historical materialism’. A
third example is Plato’s most interesting law of political
revolutions, according to which all revolutions presuppose a

disunited ruling class (or ‘elite’); a law which forms the basis of
his analysis of the means of arresting political change and creating
a social equilibrium, and which has been recently rediscovered by
the theoreticians of totalitarianism, especially by Pareto.
I shall now proceed to a more detailed discussion of these
points, especially the third, the theory of revolution and of
equilibrium.
II
The dialogues in which Plato discusses these questions are, in
chronological order, the Republic, a dialogue of much later date
called the Statesman (or the Politicus), and the Laws, the latest and
longest of his works. In spite of certain minor differences, there is
much agreement between these dialogues, which are in some
respects parallel, in others complementary, to one another. The
Laws6, for instance, present the story of the decline and fall of
human society as an account of Greek prehistory merging without
any break into history; while the parallel passages of the Republic
give, in a more abstract way, a systematic outline of the
development of government; the Statesman, still more abstract,
gives a logical classification of types of government, with only a
few allusions to historical events. Similarly, the Laws formulate
the historicist aspect of the investigation very clearly. ‘What is the
archetype or origin of a state?’ asks Plato there, linking this
question with the other: ‘Is not the best method of looking for an
answer to this question .. that of contemplating the growth of states
as they change either towards the good or towards the evil? ‘But
within the sociological doctrines, the only major difference appears
to be due to a purely speculative difficulty which seems to have
worried Plato. Assuming as the starting point of the development a
perfect and therefore incorruptible state, he found it difficult to
explain the first change, the Fall of Man, as it were, which sets
everything going7. We shall hear, in the next chapter, of Plato’s
attempt to solve this problem; but first I shall give a general survey
of his theory of social development.
According to the Republic, the original or primitive form of
society, and at the same time, the one that resembles the Form or
Idea of a state most closely, the ‘best state’, is a kingship of the
wisest and most godlike of men. This ideal city-state is so near
perfection that it is hard to understand how it can ever change.
Still, a change does take place; and with it enters Heraclitus’ strife,

the driving force of all movement. According to Plato, internal
strife, class war, fomented by self-interest and especially material
or economic self-interest, is the main force of ‘social dynamics’.
The Marxian formula ‘The history of all hitherto existing societies
is a history of class struggle’8 fits Plato’s historicism nearly as well
as that of Marx. The four most conspicuous periods or ‘landmarks
in the history of political degeneration’, and, at the same time, ‘the
most important .. varieties of existing states’9, are described by
Plato in the following order. First after the perfect state comes
‘timarchy’ or ‘timocracy’, the rule of the noble who seek honour
and fame; secondly, oligarchy, the rule of the rich families; ‘next
in order, democracy is born’, the rule of liberty which means
lawlessness; and last comes ‘tyranny .. the fourth and final sickness
of the city’10.
As can be seen from the last remark, Plato looks upon history,
which to him is a history of social decay, as if it were the history of
an illness: the patient is society; and, as we shall sec later, the
statesman ought to be a physician (and vice versa)—a healer, a
saviour. Just as the description of the typical course of an illness is
not always applicable to every individual patient, so is Plato’s
historical theory of social decay not intended to apply to the
development of every individual city. But it is intended to describe
both the original course of development by which the main forms
of constitutional decay were first generated, and the typical course
of social change11. We see that Plato aimed at setting out a system
of historical periods, governed by a law of evolution; in other
words, he aimed at a historicist theory of society. This attempt was
revived by Rousseau, and was made fashionable by Comte and
Mill, and by Hegel and Marx; but considering the historical
evidence then available, Plato’s system of historical periods was
just as good as that of any of these modern historicists. (The main
difference lies in the evaluation of the course taken by history.
While the aristocrat Plato condemned the development he
described, these modern authors applauded it, believing as they did
in a law of historical progress.)
Before discussing Plato’s perfect state in any detail, I shall give
a brief sketch of his analysis of the role played by economic
motives and the class struggle in the process of transition between
the four decaying forms of the state. The first form into which the
perfect state degenerates, timocracy, the rule of the ambitious
noblemen, is said to be in nearly all respects similar to the perfect

state itself. It is important to note that Plato explicitly identified
this best and oldest among the existing states with the Dorian
constitution of Sparta and Crete, and that these two tribal
aristocracies did in fact represent the oldest existing forms of
political life within Greece. Most of Plato’s excellent description
of their institutions is given in certain parts of his description of the
best or perfect state, to which timocracy is so similar. (Through his
doctrine of the similarity between Sparta and the perfect state,
Plato became one of the most successful propagators of what I
should like to call ‘the Great Myth of Sparta’—the perennial and
influential myth of the supremacy of the Spartan constitution and
way of life.)
The main difference between the best or ideal state and
timocracy is that the latter contains an element of instability; the
once united patriarchal ruling class is now disunited, and it is this
disunity which leads to the next step, to its degeneration into
oligarchy. Disunion is brought about by ambition. ‘First’, says
Plato, speaking of the young timocrat, ‘he hears his mother
complaining that her husband is not one of the rulers ..’12 Thus he
becomes ambitious and longs for distinction. But decisive in
bringing about the next change are competitive and acquisitive
social tendencies. ‘We must describe’, says Plato, ‘how timocracy
changes into oligarchy .. Even a blind man must see how it
changes .. It is the treasure house that ruins this constitution. They’
(the timocrats) ‘begin by creating opportunities for showing off
and spending money, and to this end they twist the laws, and they
and their wives disobey them ..; and they try to outrival one
another.’ In this way arises the first class conflict: that between
virtue and money, or between the old-established ways of feudal
simplicity and the new ways of wealth. The transition to oligarchy
is completed when the rich establish a law that ‘disqualifies from
public office all those whose means do not reach the stipulated
amount. This change is imposed by force of arms, should threats
and blackmail not succeed ..’
With the establishment of the oligarchy, a state of potential
civil war between the oligarchs and the poorer classes is reached:
‘just as a sick body .. is sometimes at strife with itself .., so is this
sick city. It falls ill and makes war on itself on the slightest pretext,
whenever the one party or the other manages to obtain help from
outside, the one from an oligarchic city, or the other from a
democracy. And does not this sick state break out at times into

civil war, even without any such help from outside?’13 This civil
war begets democracy: ‘Democracy is born .. when the poor win
the day, killing some .., banishing others, and sharing with the rest
the rights of citizenship and of public offices, on terms of equality
..’
Plato’s description of democracy is a vivid but intensely hostile
and unjust parody of the political life of Athens, and of the
democratic creed which Pericles had formulated in a manner which
has never been surpassed, about three years before Plato was born.
(Pericles’ programme is discussed in chapter 10, below14.) Plato’s
description is a brilliant piece of political propaganda, and we can
appreciate what harm it must have done if we consider, for
instance, that a man like Adam, an excellent scholar and editor of
the Republic, is unable to resist the rhetoric of Plato’s denunciation
of his native city. ‘Plato’s description of the genesis of the
democratic man’, Adam15 writes, ‘is one of the most royal and
magnificent pieces of writing in the whole range of literature,
whether ancient or modern.’ And when the same writer continues:
‘the description of the democratic man as the chameleon of the
human society paints him for all time’, then we see that Plato has
succeeded at least in turning this thinker against democracy, and
we may wonder how much damage his poisonous writing has done
when presented, unopposed, to lesser minds ...
It seems that often when Plato’s style, to use a phrase of
Adam’s16, becomes a ‘full tide of lofty thoughts and images and
words’, he is in urgent need of a cloak to cover up the rags and
tatters of his argumentation, or even, as in the present case, the
complete absence of rational arguments. In their stead he uses
invective, identifying liberty with lawlessness, freedom with
licence, and equality before the law with disorder. Democrats are
described as profligate and niggardly, as insolent, lawless, and
shameless, as fierce and as terrible beasts of prey, as gratifying
every whim, as living solely for pleasure, and for unnecessary and
unclean desires. (‘They fill their bellies like the beasts’, was
Heraclitus’ way of putting it.) They are accused of calling
‘reverence a folly ..; temperance they call cowardice ..; moderation
and orderly expenditure they call meanness and boorishness’17, etc.
‘And there are more trifles of this kind’, says Plato, when the flood
of his rhetorical abuse begins to abate, ‘the schoolmaster fears and
flatters his pupils .., and old men condescend to the young .. in
order to avoid the appearance of being sour and despotic.’ (It is

Plato the Master of the Academy who puts this into the mouth of
Socrates, forgetting that the latter had never been a schoolmaster,
and that even as an old man he had never appeared to be sour or
despotic. He had always loved, not to ‘condescend’ to the young,
but to treat them, for instance the young Plato, as his companions
and friends. Plato himself, we have reason to believe, was less
ready to ‘condescend’, and to discuss matters with his pupils.) ‘But
the height of all this abundance of freedom .. is reached’, Plato
continues, ‘when slaves, male as well as female, who have been
bought on the market, are every whit as free as those whose
property they are ... And what is the cumulative effect of all this?
That the citizens’ hearts become so very tender that they get
irritated at the mere sight of anything like slavery and do not suffer
anybody to submit to its presence ... so that they may have no
master over them.’ Here, after all, Plato pays homage to his native
city, even though he does it unwittingly. It will for ever remain one
of the greatest triumphs of Athenian democracy that it treated
slaves humanely, and that in spite of the inhuman propaganda of
philosophers like Plato himself and Aristotle it came, as he
witnesses, very close to abolishing slavery.18
Of much greater merit, although it too is inspired by hatred, is
Plato’s description of tyranny and especially of the transition to it.
He insists that he describes things which he has seen himself19; no
doubt, the allusion is to his experiences at the court of the older
Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse. The transition from democracy to
tyranny, Plato says, is most easily brought about by a popular
leader who knows how to exploit the class antagonism between the
rich and the poor within the democratic state, and who succeeds in
building up a bodyguard or a private army of his own. The people
who have hailed him first as the champion of freedom are soon
enslaved; and then they must fight for him, in ‘one war after
another which he must stir up .. because he must make the people
feel the need of a general’20. With tyranny, the most abject state is
reached.
A very similar survey of the various forms of government can
be found in the Statesman, where Plato discusses ‘the origin of the
tyrant and king, of oligarchies and aristocracies, and of
democracies’21. Again we find that the various forms of existing
governments are explained as debased copies of the true model or
Form of the state, of the perfect state, the standard of all imitations,
which is said to have existed in the ancient times of Cronos, father

of Zeus. One difference is that Plato here distinguishes six types of
debased states; but this difference is unimportant, especially if we
remember that Plato says in the Republic22 that the four types
discussed are not exhaustive, and that there are some intermediate
stages. The six types are arrived at, in the Statesman, by first
distinguishing between three forms of government, the rule of one
man, of a few, and of the many. Each of these is then subdivided
into two types, of which one is comparatively good and the other
bad, according to whether or not they imitate ‘the only true
original’ by copying and preserving its ancient laws23. In this way,
three conservative or lawful and three utterly depraved or lawless
forms are distinguished; monarchy, aristocracy, and a conservative
form of democracy are the lawful imitations, in order of merit. But
democracy changes into its lawless form, and deteriorates further,
through oligarchy, the lawless rule of the few, into a lawless rule of
the one, tyranny, which, just as Plato has said in the Republic, is
the worst of all.
That tyranny, the most evil state, need not be the end of the
development is indicated in a passage in the Laws which partly
repeats, and partly24 connects with, the story of the Statesman.
‘Give me a state governed by a young tyrant’, exclaims Plato
there,’.. who has the good fortune to be the contemporary of a
great legislator, and to meet him by some happy accident. What
more could a god do for a city which he wants to make happy?
‘Tyranny, the most evil state, may be reformed in this way. (This
agrees with the remark in the Laws, quoted above, that all change
is evil, ‘except the change of an evil thing’. There is little doubt
that Plato, when speaking of the great lawgiver and the young
tyrant, must have been thinking of himself and his various
experiments with young tyrants, and especially of his attempts at
reforming the younger Dionysius’ tyranny over Syracuse. These
ill-fated experiments will be discussed later.)
One of the main objects of Plato’s analysis of political
developments is to ascertain the driving force of all historical
change. In the Laws, the historical survey is explicitly undertaken
with this aim in view: ‘Have not uncounted thousands of cities
been born during this time .. and has not each of them been under
all kinds of government?.. Let us, if we can, get hold of the cause
of so much change. I hope that we may thus reveal the secret both
of the birth of constitutions, and also of their changes.’25 As the
result of these investigations he discovers the sociological law that

internal disunion, class war fomented by the antagonism of
economic class interests, is the driving force of all political
revolutions. But Plato’s formulation of this fundamental law goes
even further. He insists that only internal sedition within the ruling
class itself can weaken it so much that its rule can be overthrown.
‘Changes in any constitution originate, without exception, within
the ruling class itself, and only when this class becomes the seat of
disunion’26, is his formula in the Republic; and in the Laws he says
(possibly referring to this passage of the Republic): ‘How can a
kingship, or any other form of government, ever be destroyed by
anybody but the rulers themselves? Have we forgotten what we
said a while ago, when dealing with this subject, as we did the
other day?’ This sociological law, together with the observation
that economic interests are the most likely causes of disunion, is
Plato’s clue to history. But it is more. It is also the clue to his
analysis of the conditions necessary for the establishment of
political equilibrium, i.e. for arresting political change. He assumes
that these conditions were realized in the best or perfect state of
ancient times.
III
Plato’s description of the perfect or best state has usually been
interpreted as the Utopian programme of a progressivist. In spite of
his repeated assertions, in the Republic, Timaeus, and Critias, that
he is describing the distant past, and in spite of the parallel
passages in the Laws whose historical intention is manifest, it is
often assumed that it was his intention to give a veiled description
of the future. But I think that Plato meant what he said, and that
many characteristics of his best state, especially as described in
Books Two to Four of the Republic, are intended (like his accounts
of primitive society in the Statesman and the Laws) to be
historical27, or perhaps prehistorical. This may not apply to all
characteristics of the best state. Concerning, for example, the
kingship of the philosophers (described in Books Five to Seven of
the Republic), Plato indicates himself that it may be a characteristic
only of the timeless world of Forms or Ideas, of the ‘City in
Heaven’. These intentionally unhistorical elements of his
description will be discussed later, together with Plato’s ethicopolitical demands. It must, of course, be admitted that he did not
intend, in his description of the primitive or ancient constitutions,
to give an exact historical account; he certainly knew that he did

not possess the necessary data for achieving anything like that. I
believe, however, that he made a serious attempt to reconstruct the
ancient tribal forms of social life as well as he could. There is no
reason to doubt this, especially since the attempt was, in a good
number of its details, very successful. It could hardly be otherwise,
since Plato arrived at his picture by an idealized description of the
ancient tribal aristocracies of Crete and Sparta. With his acute
sociological intuition he had seen that these forms were not only
old, but petrified, arrested; that they were relics of a still older
form. And he concluded that this still older form had been even
more stable, more securely arrested. This very ancient and
accordingly very good and very stable state he tried to reconstruct
in such a way as to make clear how it had been kept free from
disunion; how class war had been avoided, and how the influence
of economic interests had been reduced to a minimum, and kept
well under control. These are the main problems of Plato’s
reconstruction of the best state.
How does Plato solve the problem of avoiding class war? Had
he been a progressivist, he might have hit on the idea of a classless,
equalitarian society; for, as we can see for instance from his own
parody of Athenian democracy, there were strong equalitarian
tendencies at work in Athens. But he was not out to construct a
state that might come, but a state that had been—the father of the
Spartan state, which was certainly not a classless society. It was a
slave state, and accordingly Plato’s best state is based on the most
rigid class distinctions. It is a caste state. The problem of avoiding
class war is solved, not by abolishing classes, but by giving the
ruling class a superiority which cannot be challenged. As in Sparta,
the ruling class alone is permitted to carry arms, it alone has any
political or other rights, and it alone receives education, i.e. a
specialized training in the art of keeping down its human sheep or
its human cattle (In fact, its overwhelming superiority disturbs
Plato a little; he fears that its members ‘may worry the sheep’,
instead of merely shearing them, and ‘act as wolves rather than
dogs’28. This problem is considered later in the chapter.) As long
as the ruling class is united, there can be no challenge to their
authority, and consequently no class war.
Plato distinguishes three classes in his best state, the guardians,
their armed auxiliaries or warriors, and the working class. But
actually there are only two castes, the military caste—the armed
and educated rulers—and the unarmed and uneducated ruled, the

human sheep; for the guardians are no separate caste, but merely
old and wise warriors who have been promoted from the ranks of
the auxiliaries. That Plato divides his ruling caste into two classes,
the guardians and the auxiliaries, without elaborating similar
subdivisions within the working class, is largely due to the fact that
he is interested only in the rulers. The workers, tradesmen, etc., do
not interest him at all, they are only human cattle whose sole
function is to provide for the material needs of the ruling class.
Plato even goes so far as to forbid his rulers to legislate for people
of this class, and for their petty problems.29 This is why our
information about the lower classes is so scanty. But Plato’s
silence is not wholly uninterrupted. ‘Are there not drudges’, he
asks once, ‘who do not possess a spark of intelligence and are
unworthy to be admitted into the community, but who have strong
bodies for hard labour?’ Since this nasty remark has given rise to
the soothing comment that Plato does not admit slaves into his city,
I may here point out that this view is mistaken. It is true that Plato
discusses nowhere explicitly the status of slaves in his best state,
and it is even true that he says that the name ‘slave’ should better
be avoided, and that we should call the workers ‘supporters’ or
even ‘employers’. But this is done for propagandist reasons.
Nowhere is the slightest suggestion to be found that the institution
of slavery is to be abolished, or to be mitigated. On the contrary,
Plato has only scorn for those ‘tenderhearted’ Athenian democrats
who supported the abolitionist movement. And he makes his view
quite clear, for example, in his description of timocracy, the
second-best state, and the one directly following the best. There he
says of the timocratic man: ‘He will be inclined to treat slaves
cruelly, for he does not despise them as much as a well-educated
man would.’ But since only in the best city can education be found
which is superior to that of timocracy, we are bound to conclude
that there are slaves in Plato’s best city, and that they are not
treated with cruelty, but are properly despised. In his righteous
contempt for them, Plato does not elaborate the point. This
conclusion is fully corroborated by the fact that a passage in the
Republic which criticizes the current practice of Greeks enslaving
Greeks ends up with the explicit endorsement of the enslaving of
barbarians, and even with a recommendation to ‘our citizens’—i.e.
those of the best city—to ‘do unto barbarians as Greeks now do
unto Greeks’. And it is further corroborated by the contents of the
Laws, and the most inhuman attitude towards slaves adopted there.

Since the ruling class alone has political power, including the
power of keeping the number of the human cattle within such
limits as to prevent them from becoming a danger, the whole
problem of preserving the state is reduced to that of preserving the
internal unity of the master class. How is this unity of the rulers
preserved? By training and other psychological influences, but
otherwise mainly by the elimination of economic interests which
may lead to disunion. This economic abstinence is achieved and
controlled by the introduction of communism, i.e. by the abolition
of private property, especially of precious metals. (The possession
of precious metals was forbidden in Sparta.) This communism is
confined to the ruling class, which alone must be kept free from
disunion; quarrels among the ruled are not worthy of consideration.
Since all property is common property, there must also be a
common ownership of women and children. No member of the
ruling class must be able to identify his children, or his parents.
The family must be destroyed, or rather, extended to cover the
whole warrior class. Family loyalties might otherwise become a
possible source of disunion; therefore ‘each should look upon all as
if belonging to one family’30. (This suggestion was neither so
novel nor so revolutionary as it sounds; we must remember such
Spartan restrictions on the privacy of family life as the ban on
private meals, constantly referred to by Plato as the institution of
‘common meals’.) But even the common ownership of women and
children is not quite sufficient to guard the ruling class from all
economic dangers. It is important to avoid prosperity as well as
poverty. Both are dangers to unity: poverty, because it drives
people to adopt desperate means to satisfy their needs; prosperity,
because most change arises from abundance, from an accumulation
of wealth which makes dangerous experiments possible. Only a
communist system which has room neither for great want nor for
great wealth can reduce economic interests to a minimum, and
guarantee the unity of the ruling class.
The communism of the ruling caste of his best city can thus be
derived from Plato’s fundamental sociological law of change; it is
a necessary condition of the political stability which is its
fundamental characteristic. But although an important condition, it
is not a sufficient one. In order that the ruling class may feel really
united, that it should feel like one tribe, i.e. like one big family,
pressure from without the class is as necessary as are the ties
between the members of the class. This pressure can be secured by

emphasizing and widening the gulf between the rulers and the
ruled. The stronger the feeling that the ruled are a different and an
altogether inferior race, the stronger will be the sense of unity
among the rulers. We arrive in this way at the fundamental
principle, announced only after some hesitation, that there must be
no mingling between the classes31: ‘Any meddling or changing
over from one class to another’, says Plato, ‘is a great crime
against the city and may rightly be denounced as the basest
wickedness.’ But such a rigid division of the classes must be
justified, and an attempt to justify it can only proceed from the
claim that the rulers are superior to the ruled. Accordingly, Plato
tries to justify his class division by the threefold claim that the
rulers are vastly superior in three respects—in race, in education,
and in their scale of values. Plato’s moral valuations, which are, of
course, identical with those of the rulers of his best state, will be
discussed in chapters 6 to 8; I may therefore confine myself here to
describing some of his ideas concerning the origin, the breeding,
and the education of his ruling class. (Before proceeding to this
description, I wish to express my belief that personal superiority,
whether racial or intellectual or moral or educational, can never
establish a claim to political prerogatives, even if such superiority
could be ascertained. Most people in civilized countries nowadays
admit racial superiority to be a myth; but even if it were an
established fact, it should not create special political rights, though
it might create special moral responsibilities for the superior
persons. Analogous demands should be made of those who are
intellectually and morally and educationally superior; and I cannot
help feeling that the opposite claims of certain intellectualists and
moralists only show how little successful their education has been,
since it failed to make them aware of their own limitations, and of
their Pharisaism.)
IV
If we want to understand Plato’s views about the origin,
breeding, and education of his ruling class, we must not lose sight
of the two main points of our analysis. We must keep in mind, first
of all, that Plato is reconstructing a city of the past, although one
connected with the present in such a way that certain of its features
are still discernible in existing states, for instance, in Sparta; and
secondly, that he is reconstructing his city with a view to the
conditions of its stability, and that he seeks the guarantees for this

stability solely within the ruling class itself, and more especially, in
its unity and strength.
Regarding the origin of the ruling class, it may be mentioned
that Plato speaks in the Statesman of a time, prior even to that of
his best state, when ‘God himself was the shepherd of men, ruling
over them exactly as man .. still rules over the beasts. There was ..
no ownership of women and children’32. This is not merely the
simile of the good shepherd; in the light of what Plato says in the
Laws, it must be interpreted more literally than that. For there we
are told that this primitive society, which is prior even to the first
and best city, is one of nomad hill shepherds under a patriarch:
‘Government originated’, says Plato there of the period prior to the
first settlement,’.. as the rule of the eldest who inherited his
authority from his father or mother; all the others followed him
like a flock of birds, thus forming one single horde ruled by that
patriarchal authority and kingship which of all kingships is the
most just.’ These nomad tribes, we hear, settled in the cities of the
Peloponnese, especially in Sparta, under the name of ‘Dorians’.
How this happened is not very clearly explained, but we
understand Plato’s reluctance when we get a hint that the
‘settlement’ was in fact a violent subjugation. This, for all we
know, is the true story of the Dorian settlement in the Peloponnese.
We therefore have every reason to believe that Plato intended his
story as a serious description of prehistoric events; as a description
not only of the origin of the Dorian master race but also of the
origin of their human cattle, i.e. the original inhabitants. In a
parallel passage in the Republic, Plato gives us a mythological yet
very pointed description of the conquest itself, when dealing with
the origin of the ‘earthborn’, the ruling class of the best city. (The
Myth of the Earthborn will be discussed from a different point of
view in chapter 8.) Their victorious march into the city, previously
founded by the tradesmen and workers, is described as follows:
‘After having armed and trained the earthborn, let us now make
them advance, under the command of the guardians, till they arrive
in the city. Then let them look round to find out the best place for
their camp—the spot that is most suitable for keeping down the
inhabitants, should anyone show unwillingness to obey the law,
and for holding back external enemies who may come down like
wolves on the fold.’ This short but triumphant tale of the
subjugation of a sedentary population by a conquering war horde
(who are identified, in the Statesman, with the nomad hill

shepherds of the period before the settlement) must be kept in
mind when we interpret Plato’s reiterated insistence that good
rulers, whether gods or demigods or guardians, are patriarchal
shepherds of men, and that the true political art, the art of ruling, is
a kind of herdsmanship, i.e. the art of managing and keeping down
the human cattle. And it is in this light that we must consider his
description of the breeding and training of ‘the auxiliaries who are
subject to the rulers like sheep-dogs to the shepherds of the state’.
The breeding and the education of the auxiliaries and thereby
of the ruling class of Plato’s best state is, like their carrying of
arms, a class symbol and therefore a class prerogative33. And
breeding and education are not empty symbols but, like arms,
instruments of class rule, and necessary for ensuring the stability of
this rule. They are treated by Plato solely from this point of view,
i.e. as powerful political weapons, as means which are useful for
herding the human cattle, and for unifying the ruling class.
To this end, it is important that the master class should feel as
one superior master race. ‘The race of the guardians must be kept
pure’34, says Plato (in defence of infanticide), when developing the
racialist argument that we breed animals with great care while
neglecting our own race, an argument which has been repeated
ever since. (Infanticide was not an Athenian institution; Plato,
seeing that it was practised at Sparta for eugenic reasons,
concluded that it must be ancient and therefore good.) He demands
that the same principles be applied to the breeding of the master
race as are applied, by an experienced breeder, to dogs, horses, or
birds. ‘If you did not breed them in this way, don’t you think that
the race of your birds or dogs would quickly degenerate?’ Plato
argues; and he draws the conclusion that ‘the same principles apply
to the race of men’. The racial qualities demanded from a guardian
or from an auxiliary are, more specifically, those of a sheep-dog.
‘Our warrior-athletes .. must be vigilant like watch-dogs’, demands
Plato, and he asks: ‘Surely, there is no difference, so far as their
natural fitness for keeping guard is concerned, between a gallant
youth and a well-bred dog?’ In his enthusiasm and admiration for
the dog, Plato goes so far as to discern in him a ‘genuine
philosophical nature’; for ‘is not the love of learning identical with
the philosophical attitude?’
The main difficulty which besets Plato is that guardians and
auxiliaries must be endowed with a character that is fierce and
gentle at the same time. It is clear that they must be bred to be

fierce, since they must ‘meet any danger in a fearless and
unconquerable spirit’. Yet ‘if their nature is to be like that, how are
they to be kept from being violent against one another, or against
the rest of the citizens?’35 Indeed, it would be ‘simply monstrous if
the shepherds should keep dogs .. who would worry the sheep,
behaving like wolves rather than dogs’. The problem is important
from the point of view of the political equilibrium, or rather, of the
stability of the state, for Plato does not rely on an equilibrium of
the forces of the various classes, since that would be unstable. A
control of the master class, its arbitrary powers, and its fierceness,
through the opposing force of the ruled, is out of the question, for
the superiority of the master class must remain unchallenged. The
only admissible control of the master class is therefore self-control.
Just as the ruling class must exercise economic abstinence, i.e.
refrain from an excessive economic exploitation of the ruled, so it
must also be able to refrain from too much fierceness in its
dealings with the ruled. But this can only be achieved if the
fierceness of its nature is balanced by its gentleness. Plato finds
this a very serious problem, since ‘the fierce nature is the exact
opposite of the gentle nature’. His speaker, Socrates, reports that
he is perplexed, until he remembers the dog again. ‘Well-bred dogs
are by nature most gentle to their friends and acquaintances, but
the very opposite to strangers’, he says. It is therefore proved ‘that
the character we try to give our guardians is not contrary to
nature’. The aim of breeding the master race is thus established,
and shown to be attainable. It has been derived from an analysis of
the conditions which are necessary for keeping the state stable.
Plato’s educational aim is exactly the same. It is the purely
political aim of stabilizing the state by blending a fierce and a
gentle element in the character of the rulers. The two disciplines in
which children of the Greek upper class were educated, gymnastics
and music (the latter, in the wider sense of the word, included all
literary studies), are correlated by Plato with the two elements of
character, fierceness and gentleness. ‘Have you not observed’, asks
Plato36, ‘how the character is affected by an exclusive training in
gymnastics without music, and how it is affected by the opposite
training?.. Exclusive preoccupation with gymnastics produces men
who are fiercer than they ought to be, while an analogous
preoccupation with music makes them too soft .. But we maintain
that our guardians must combine both of these natures .. This is
why I say that some god must have given man these two arts,

music and gymnastics; and their purpose is not so much to serve
soul and body respectively, but rather to tune properly the two
main strings’, i.e. to bring into harmony the two elements of the
soul, gentleness and fierceness. ‘These are the outlines of our
system of education and training’, Plato concludes his analysis.
In spite of the fact that Plato identifies the gentle clement of the
soul with her philosophic disposition, and in spite of the fact that
philosophy is going to play such a dominant role in the later parts
of the Republic, he is not at all biased in favour of the gentle
element of the soul, or of musical, i.e. literary, education. The
impartiality in balancing the two elements is the more remarkable
as it leads him to impose the most severe restrictions on literary
education, compared with what was, in his time, customary in
Athens. This, of course, is only part of his general tendency to
prefer Spartan customs to Athenian ones. (Crete, his other model,
was even more anti-musical than Sparta37.) Plato’s political
principles of literary education are based upon a simple
comparison. Sparta, he saw, treated its human cattle just a little too
harshly; this is a symptom or even an admission of a feeling of
weakness38, and therefore a symptom of the incipient degeneration
of the master class. Athens, on the other hand, was altogether too
liberal and slack in her treatment of slaves. Plato took this as proof
that Sparta insisted just a little too much on gymnastics, and
Athens, of course, far too much on music. This simple estimate
enabled him readily to reconstruct what in his opinion must have
been the true measure or the true blend of the two elements in the
education of the best state, and to lay down the principles of his
educational policy. Judged from the Athenian viewpoint, it is
nothing less than the demand that all literary education be
strangled39 by a close adherence to the example of Sparta with its
strict state control of all literary matters. Not only poetry but also
music in the ordinary sense of the term are to be controlled by a
rigid censorship, and both are to be devoted entirely to
strengthening the stability of the state by making the young more
conscious of class discipline40, and thus more ready to serve class
interests. Plato even forgets that it is the function of music to make
the young more gentle, for he demands such forms of music as will
make them braver, i.e. fiercer. (Considering that Plato was an
Athenian, his arguments concerning music proper appear to me
almost incredible in their superstitious intolerance, especially if
compared with a more enlightened contemporary criticism41. But

even now he has many musicians on his side, possibly because
they are flattered by his high opinion of the importance of music,
i.e. of its political power. The same is true of educationists, and
even more of philosophers, since Plato demands that they should
rule; a demand which will be discussed in chapter 8.)
The political principle that determines the education of the
soul, namely, the preservation of the stability of the state,
determines also that of the body. The aim is simply that of Sparta.
While the Athenian citizen was educated to a general versatility,
Plato demands that the ruling class shall be trained as a class of
professional warriors, ready to strike against enemies from without
or from within the state. Children of both sexes, we are told twice,
‘must be taken on horseback within the sight of actual war; and
provided it can be done safely, they must be brought into battle,
and made to taste blood; just as one does with young hounds’42.
The description of a modern writer, who characterizes
contemporary totalitarian education as ‘an intensified and
continual form of mobilization’, fits Plato’s whole system of
education very well indeed.
This is an outline of Plato’s theory of the best or most ancient
state, of the city which treats its human cattle exactly as a wise but
hardened shepherd treats his sheep; not too cruelly, but with the
proper contempt ... As an analysis both of Spartan social
institutions and of the conditions of their stability and instability,
and as an attempt at reconstructing more rigid and primitive forms
of tribal life, this description is excellent indeed. (Only the
descriptive aspect is dealt with in this chapter. The ethical aspects
will be discussed later.) I believe that much in Plato’s writings that
has been usually considered as mere mythological or Utopian
speculation can in this way be interpreted as sociological
description and analysis. If we look, for instance, at his myth of the
triumphant war hordes subjugating a settled population, then we
must admit that from the point of view of descriptive sociology it
is most successful. In fact, it could even claim to be an anticipation
of an interesting (though possibly too sweeping) modern theory of
the origin of the state, according to which centralized and
organized political power generally originates in such a conquest43.
There may be more descriptions of this kind in Plato’s writings
than we can at present estimate.

V
To sum up. In an attempt to understand and to interpret the
changing social world as he experienced it, Plato was led to
develop a systematic historicist sociology in great detail. He
thought of existing states as decaying copies of an unchanging
Form or Idea. He tried to reconstruct this Form or Idea of a state,
or at least to describe a society which resembled it as closely as
possible. Along with ancient traditions, he used as material for his
reconstruction the results of his analysis of the social institutions of
Sparta and Crete—the most ancient forms of social life he could
find in Greece—in which he recognized arrested forms of even
older tribal societies. But in order to make a proper use of this
material, he needed a principle for distinguishing between the good
or original or ancient traits of the existing institutions and their
symptoms of decay. This principle he found in his law of political
revolutions, according to which disunion in the ruling class, and
their preoccupation with economic affairs, are the origin of all
social change. His best state was therefore to be reconstructed in
such a way as to eliminate all the germs and elements of disunion
and decay as radically as this could be done; that is to say, it was to
be constructed out of the Spartan state with an eye to the
conditions necessary for the unbroken unity of the master class,
guaranteed by its economic abstinence, its breeding, and its
training.
Interpreting existing societies as decadent copies of an ideal
state, Plato furnished Hesiod’s somewhat crude views of human
history at once with a theoretical background and with a wealth of
practical application. He developed a remarkably realistic
historicist theory which found the cause of social change in
Heraclitus’ disunion, and in the strife of classes in which he
recognized the driving as well as the corrupting forces of history.
He applied these historicist principles to the story of the Decline
and Fall of the Greek city-states, and especially to a criticism of
democracy, which he described as effeminate and degenerate. And
we may add that later, in the Laws44, he applied them also to a
story of the Decline and Fall of the Persian Empire, thus making
the beginning of a long series of Decline-and-Fall dramatizations
of the histories of empires and civilizations. (O. Spengler’s
notorious Decline of the West is perhaps the worst but not the last45
of them.) All this, I think, can be interpreted as an attempt, and a
most impressive one, to explain, and to rationalize, his experience

of the breakdown of the tribal society; an experience analogous to
that which had led Heraclitus to develop the first philosophy of
change.
But our analysis of Plato’s descriptive sociology is still
incomplete His stories of the Decline and Fall, and with it nearly
all the later stories, exhibit at least two characteristics which we
have not discussed so far. He conceived these declining societies
as some kind of organism, and the decline as a process similar to
ageing And he believed that the decline is well deserved, in the
sense that moral decay, a fall and decline of the soul, goes hand in
hand with that of the social body. All this plays an important role
in Plato’s theory of the first change—in the Story of the Number
and of the Fall of Man. This theory, and its connection with the
doctrine of Forms or Ideas, will be discussed in the next chapter.

Chapter 5: Nature And Convention
Plato was not the first to approach social phenomena in the
spirit of scientific investigation. The beginning of social science
goes back at least to the generation of Protagoras, the first of the
great thinkers who called themselves ‘Sophists’. It is marked by
the realization of the need to distinguish between two different
elements in man’s environment—his natural environment and his
social environment. This is a distinction which is difficult to make
and to grasp, as can be inferred from the fact that even now it is not
clearly established in our minds. It has been questioned ever since
the time of Protagoras. Most of us, it seems, have a strong
inclination to accept the peculiarities of our social environment as
if they were ‘natural’.
It is one of the characteristics of the magical attitude of a
primitive tribal or ‘closed’ society that it lives in a charmed circle1
of unchanging taboos, of laws and customs which are felt to be as
inevitable as the rising of the sun, or the cycle of the seasons, or
similar obvious regularities of nature. And it is only after this
magical ‘closed society’ has actually broken down that a
theoretical understanding of the difference between ‘nature’ and
‘society’ can develop.
I
An analysis of this development requires, I believe, a clear
grasp of an important distinction. It is the distinction between (a)
natural laws, or laws of nature, such as the laws describing the

movements of the sun, the moon, and the planets, the succession of
the seasons, etc., or the law of gravity or, say, the laws of
thermodynamics, and, on the other hand, (b) normative laws, or
norms, or prohibitions and commandments, i.e. such rules as forbid
or demand certain modes of conduct; examples are the Ten
Commandments or the legal rules regulating the procedure of the
election of Members of Parliament, or the laws that constitute the
Athenian Constitution.
Since the discussion of these matters is often vitiated by a
tendency to blur this distinction, a few more words may be said
about it. A law in sense (a)—a natural law—is describing a strict,
unvarying regularity which either in fact holds in nature (in this
case, the law is a true statement) or does not hold (in this case it is
false). If we do not know whether a law of nature is true or false,
and if we wish to draw attention to our uncertainty, we often call it
an ‘hypothesis’. A law of nature is unalterable; there are no
exceptions to it. For if we are satisfied that something has
happened which contradicts it, then we do not say that there is an
exception, or an alteration to the law, but rather that our hypothesis
has been refuted, since it has turned out that the supposed strict
regularity did not hold, or in other words, that the supposed law of
nature was not a true law of nature, but a false statement. Since
laws of nature are unalterable, they can be neither broken nor
enforced. They are beyond human control, although they may
possibly be used by us for technical purposes, and although we
may get into trouble by not knowing them, or by ignoring them.
All this is very different if we turn to laws of the kind (b), that
is, to normative laws. A normative law, whether it is now a legal
enactment or a moral commandment, can be enforced by men.
Also, it is alterable. It may be perhaps described as good or bad,
right or wrong, acceptable or unacceptable; but only in a
metaphorical sense can it be called ‘true’ or ‘false’, since it does
not describe a fact, but lays down directions for our behaviour. If it
has any point or significance, then it can be broken; and if it cannot
be broken then it is superfluous and without significance. ‘Do not
spend more money than you possess’ is a significant normative
law; it may be significant as a moral or legal rule, and the more
necessary as it is so often broken. ‘Do not take more money out of
your purse than there was in it’ may be said to be, by its wording,
also a normative law; but nobody would consider seriously such a
rule as a significant part of a moral or legal system, since it cannot

be broken. If a significant normative law is observed, then this is
always due to human control—to human actions and decisions.
Usually it is due to the decision to introduce sanctions—to punish
or restrain those who break the law.
I believe, in common with a great number of thinkers, and
especially with many social scientists, that the distinction between
laws in sense (a), i.e. statements describing regularities of nature,
and laws in sense (b), i.e. norms such as prohibitions or
commandments, is a fundamental one, and that these two kinds of
law have hardly more in common than a name. But this view is by
no means generally accepted; on the contrary, many thinkers
believe that there are norms—prohibitions or commandments—
which are ‘natural’ in the sense that they are laid down in
accordance with natural laws in sense (a). They say, for example,
that certain legal norms are in accordance with human nature, and
therefore with psychological natural laws in sense (a), while other
legal norms may be contrary to human nature; and they add that
those norms which can be shown to be in accordance with human
nature are really not very different from natural laws in sense (a).
Others say that natural laws in sense (a) are really very similar to
normative laws since they are laid down by the will or decision of
the Creator of the Universe—a view which, undoubtedly, lies
behind the use of the originally normative word ‘law’ for laws of
the kind (a). All these views may be worthy of being discussed.
But in order to discuss them, it is necessary first to distinguish
between laws in the sense of (a) and laws in the sense of (b), and
not to confuse the issue by a bad terminology. Thus we shall
reserve the term ‘natural laws’ exclusively for laws of type (a), and
we shall refuse to apply this term to any norms which are claimed
to be, in some sense or other, ‘natural’. The confusion is quite
unnecessary since it is easy to speak of ‘natural rights and
obligations’ or of ‘natural norms’ if we wish to stress the ‘natural’
character of laws of type (b).
II
I believe that it is necessary for the understanding of Plato’s
sociology to consider how the distinction between natural and
normative laws may have developed. I shall first discuss what
seem to have been the starting point and the last step of the
development, and later what seem to have been three intermediate
steps, which all play a part in Plato’s theory. The starting point can

be described as a naive monism. It may be said to be characteristic
of the ‘closed society’. The last step, which I describe as critical
dualism (or critical conventionalism), is characteristic of the ‘open
society’. The fact that there are still many who try to avoid making
this step may be taken as an indication that we are still in the midst
of the transition from the closed to the open society. (With all this,
compare chapter 10.)
The starting point which I have called ‘naive monism’ is the
stage at which the distinction between natural and normative laws
is not yet made. Unpleasant experiences are the means by which
man learns to adjust himself to his environment. No distinction is
made between sanctions imposed by other men, if a normative
taboo is broken, and unpleasant experiences suffered in the natural
environment. Within this stage, we may further distinguish
between two possibilities. The one can be described as a naive
naturalism. At this stage regularities, whether natural or
conventional, are felt to be beyond the possibility of any alteration
whatever. But I believe that this stage is only an abstract possibility
which probably was never realized. More important is a stage
which we can describe as a naive conventionalism—a stage at
which both natural and normative regularities are experienced as
expressions of, and as dependent upon, the decisions of man-like
gods or demons. Thus the cycle of the seasons, or the peculiarities
of the movements of the sun, the moon, and the planets, may be
interpreted as obeying the ‘laws’ or ‘decrees’ or ‘decisions’ which
‘rule heaven and earth’, and which were laid down and
‘pronounced by the creator-god in the beginning’2. It is
understandable that those who think in this way may believe that
even the natural laws are open to modifications, under certain
exceptional circumstances; that with the help of magical practices
man may sometimes influence them; and that natural regularities
are upheld by sanctions, as if they were normative. This point is
well illustrated by Heraclitus’ saying: ‘The sun will not outstep the
measure of his path; or else the goddesses of Fate, the handmaids
of Justice, will know how to find him.’
The breakdown of magic tribalism is closely connected with
the realization that taboos are different in various tribes, that they
are imposed and enforced by man, and that they may be broken
without unpleasant repercussions if one can only escape the
sanctions imposed by one’s fellow-men. This realization is
quickened when it is observed that laws are altered and made by

human lawgivers. I have in mind not only such lawgivers as Solon,
but also the laws which were made and enforced by the common
people of democratic cities. These experiences may lead to a
conscious differentiation between the man-enforced normative
laws, based on decisions or conventions, and the natural
regularities which are beyond his power. When this differentiation
is clearly understood, then we can describe the position reached as
a critical dualism, or critical conventionalism. In the development
of Greek philosophy this dualism of facts and norms announces
itself in terms of the opposition between nature and convention.3
In spite of the fact that this position was reached a long time
ago by the Sophist Protagoras, an older contemporary of Socrates,
it is still so little understood that it seems necessary to explain it in
some detail. First, we must not think that critical dualism implies a
theory of the historical origin of norms. It has nothing to do with
the obviously untenable historical assertion that norms in the first
place were consciously made or introduced by man, instead of
having been found by him to be simply there (whenever he was
first able to find anything of this kind). It therefore has nothing to
do with the assertion that norms originate with man, and not with
God, nor does it underrate the importance of normative laws. Least
of all has it anything to do with the assertion that norms, since they
are conventional, i.e. man-made, are therefore ‘merely arbitrary’.
Critical dualism merely asserts that norms and normative laws can
be made and changed by man, more especially by a decision or
convention to observe them or to alter them, and that it is therefore
man who is morally responsible for them; not perhaps for the
norms which he finds to exist in society when he first begins to
reflect upon them, but for the norms which he is prepared to
tolerate once he has found out that he can do something to alter
them. Norms are man-made in the sense that we must blame
nobody but ourselves for them; neither nature, nor God. It is our
business to improve them as much as we can, if we find that they
are objectionable. This last remark implies that by describing
norms as conventional, I do not mean that they must be arbitrary,
or that one set of normative laws will do just as well as another. By
saying that some systems of laws can be improved, that some laws
may be better than others, I rather imply that we can compare the
existing normative laws (or social institutions) with some standard
norms which we have decided are worthy of being realized. But
even these standards are of our making in the sense that our

decision in favour of them is our own decision, and that we alone
carry the responsibility for adopting them. The standards are not to
be found in nature. Nature consists of facts and of regularities, and
is in itself neither moral nor immoral. It is we who impose our
standards upon nature, and who in this way introduce morals into
the natural world4, in spite of the fact that we are part of this world.
We are products of nature, but nature has made us together with
our power of altering the world, of foreseeing and of planning for
the future, and of making far-reaching decisions for which we are
morally responsible. Yet responsibility, decisions, enter the world
of nature only with us.
III
It is important for the understanding of this attitude to realize
that these decisions can never be derived from facts (or from
statements of facts), although they pertain to facts. The decision,
for instance, to oppose slavery does not depend upon the fact that
all men are born free and equal, and that no man is born in chains.
For even if all were born free, some men might perhaps try to put
others in chains, and they may even believe that they ought to put
them in chains. And conversely, even if men were born in chains,
many of us might demand the removal of these chains. Or to put
this matter more precisely, if we consider a fact as alterable—such
as the fact that many people are suffering from diseases—then we
can always adopt a number of different attitudes towards this fact:
more especially, we can decide to make an attempt to alter it; or we
can decide to resist any such attempt; or we can decide not to take
action at all.
All moral decisions pertain in this way to some fact or other,
especially to some fact of social life, and all (alterable) facts of
social life can give rise to many different decisions. Which shows
that the decisions can never be derivable from these facts, or from
a description of these facts.
But they cannot be derived from another class of facts either; I
mean those natural regularities which we describe with the help of
natural laws. It is perfectly true that our decisions must be
compatible with the natural laws (including those of human
physiology and psychology), if they are ever to be carried into
effect; for if they run counter to such laws, then they simply cannot
be carried out. The decision that all should work harder and eat
less, for example, cannot be carried out beyond a certain point for

physiological reasons, i.e. because beyond a certain point it would
be incompatible with certain natural laws of physiology. Similarly,
the decision that all should work less and eat more also cannot be
carried out beyond a certain point, for various reasons, including
the natural laws of economics. (As we shall see below, in section
iv of this chapter, there are natural laws in the social sciences also;
we shall call them ‘sociological laws’.)
Thus certain decisions may be eliminated as incapable of being
executed, because they contradict certain natural laws (or
‘unalterable facts’). But this does not mean, of course, that any
decision can be logically derived from such ‘unalterable facts’.
Rather, the situation is this. In view of any fact whatsoever,
whether it is alterable or unalterable, we can adopt various
decisions—such as to alter it; to protect it from those who wish to
alter it; not to interfere, etc. But if the fact in question is
unalterable—either because an alteration is impossible in view of
the existing laws of nature, or because an alteration is for other
reasons too difficult for those who wish to alter it—then any
decision to alter it will be simply impracticable; in fact, any
decision concerning such a fact will be pointless and without
significance.
Critical dualism thus emphasizes the impossibility of reducing
decisions or norms to facts; it can therefore be described as a
dualism of facts and decisions.
But this dualism seems to be open to attack. Decisions are
facts, it may be said. If we decide to adopt a certain norm, then the
making of this decision is itself a psychological or sociological
fact, and it would be absurd to say that there is nothing in common
between such facts and other facts. Since it cannot be doubted that
our decisions about norms, i.e. the norms we adopt, clearly depend
upon certain psychological facts, such as the influence of our
upbringing, it seems to be absurd to postulate a dualism of facts
and decisions, or to say that decisions cannot be derived from
facts. This objection can be answered by pointing out that we can
speak of a ‘decision’ in two different senses. We may speak of a
certain decision which has been submitted, or considered, or
reached, or been decided upon; or alternatively, we may speak of
an act of deciding and call this a ‘decision’. Only in the second
sense can we describe a decision as a fact. The situation is
analogous with a number of other expressions. In one sense, we
may speak of a certain resolution which has been submitted to

some council, and in the other sense, the council’s act of taking it
may be spoken of as the council’s resolution. Similarly, we may
speak of a proposal or a suggestion before us, and on the other
hand of the act of proposing or suggesting something, which may
also be called ‘proposal’ or ‘suggestion’. An analogous ambiguity
is well known in the field of descriptive statements. Let us consider
the statement: ‘Napoleon died on St. Helena.’ It will be useful to
distinguish this statement from the fact which it describes, and
which we may call the primary fact, viz. the fact that Napoleon
died at St. Helena. Now a historian, say Mr. A, when writing the
biography of Napoleon, may make the statement mentioned. In
doing so, he is describing what we called the primary fact. But
there is also a secondary fact, which is altogether different from the
primary one, namely the fact that he made this statement; and
another historian, Mr. B, when writing the biography of Mr. A,
may describe this second fact by saying: ‘Mr. A stated that
Napoleon died on St. Helena.’ The secondary fact described in this
way happens to be itself a description. But it is a description in a
sense of the word that must be distinguished from the sense in
which we called the statement ‘Napoleon died on St. Helena’ a
description. The making of a description, or of a statement, is a
sociological or psychological fact. But the description made is to
be distinguished from the fact that it has been made. It cannot even
be derived from this fact; for that would mean that we can validly
deduce ‘Napoleon died on St. Helena’ from ‘Mr. A stated that
Napoleon died on St. Helena’, which obviously we cannot.
In the field of decisions, the situation is analogous. The making
of a decision, the adoption of a norm or of a standard, is a fact. But
the norm or standard which has been adopted, is not a fact. That
most people agree with the norm ‘Thou shalt not steal’ is a
sociological fact. But the norm ‘Thou shalt not steal’ is not a fact,
and can never be inferred from sentences describing facts. This
will be seen most clearly when we remember that there are always
various and even opposite decisions possible with respect to a
certain relevant fact. For instance, in face of the sociological fact
that most people adopt the norm ‘Thou shalt not steal’, it is still
possible to decide either to adopt this norm, or to oppose its
adoption; it is possible to encourage those who have adopted the
norm, or to discourage them, and to persuade them to adopt
another norm. To sum up, it is impossible to derive a sentence
stating a norm or a decision or, say, a proposal for a policy from a

sentence stating a fact; this is only another way of saying that it is
impossible to derive norms or decisions or proposals from facts5.
The statement that norms are man-made (man-made not in the
sense that they were consciously designed, but in the sense that
men can judge and alter them—that is to say, in the sense that the
responsibility for them is entirely ours) has often been
misunderstood. Nearly all misunderstandings can be traced back to
one fundamental misapprehension, namely, to the belief that
‘convention’ implies ‘arbitrariness’; that if we are free to choose
any system of norms we like, then one system is just as good as
any other. It must, of course, be admitted that the view that norms
are conventional or artificial indicates that there will be a certain
element of arbitrariness involved, i.e. that there may be different
systems of norms between which there is not much to choose (a
fact that has been duly emphasized by Protagoras). But artificiality
by no means implies full arbitrariness. Mathematical calculi, for
instance, or symphonies, or plays, are highly artificial, yet it does
not follow that one calculus or symphony or play is just as good as
any other. Man has created new worlds—of language, of music, of
poetry, of science; and the most important of these is the world of
the moral demands, for equality, for freedom, and for helping the
weak6. When comparing the field of morals with the field of music
or of mathematics, I do not wish to imply that these similarities
reach very far. There is, more especially, a great difference
between moral decisions and decisions in the field of art. Many
moral decisions involve the life and death of other men. Decisions
in the field of art are much less urgent and important. It is therefore
most misleading to say that a man decides for or against slavery as
he may decide for or against certain works of music and literature,
or that moral decisions are purely matters of taste. Nor are they
merely decisions about how to make the world more beautiful, or
about other luxuries of this kind; they are decisions of much
greater urgency. (With all this, cp. also chapter 9.) Our comparison
is only intended to show that the view that moral decisions rest
with us does not imply that they are entirely arbitrary.
The view that norms are man-made is also, strangely enough,
contested by some who see in this attitude an attack on religion. It
must be admitted, of course, that this view is an attack on certain
forms of religion, namely, on the religion of blind authority, on
magic and tabooism. But I do not think that it is in any way
opposed to a religion built upon the idea of personal responsibility

and freedom of conscience. I have in mind, of course, especially
Christianity, at least as it is usually interpreted in democratic
countries; that Christianity which, as against all tabooism,
preaches, ‘Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time ...
But I say unto you ..’; opposing in every case the voice of
conscience to mere formal obedience and the fulfilment of the law.
I would not admit that to think of ethical laws as being manmade in this sense is incompatible with the religious view that they
are given to us by God. Historically, all ethics undoubtedly begin
with religion; but I do not now deal with historical questions. I do
not ask who was the first ethical lawgiver. I only maintain that it is
we, and we alone, who are responsible for adopting or rejecting
some suggested moral laws; it is we who must distinguish between
the true prophets and the false prophets. All kinds of norms have
been claimed to be God-given. If you accept the ‘Christian’ ethics
of equality and toleration and freedom of conscience only because
of its claim to rest upon divine authority, then you build on a weak
basis; for it has been only too often claimed that inequality is
willed by God, and that we must not be tolerant with unbelievers.
If, however, you accept the Christian ethics not because you are
commanded to do so but because of your conviction that it is the
right decision to take, then it is you who have decided. My
insistence that we make the decisions and carry the responsibility
must not be taken to imply that we cannot, or must not, be helped
by faith, and inspired by tradition or by great examples. Nor does it
imply that the creation of moral decisions is merely a ‘natural’
process, i.e. of the order of physico-chemical processes. In fact,
Protagoras, the first critical dualist, taught that nature does not
know norms, and that the introduction of norms is due to man, and
the most important of human achievements. He thus held that
‘institutions and conventions were what raised men above the
brutes’, as Burnet7 puts it. But in spite of his insistence that man
creates norms, that it is man who is the measure of all things, he
believed that man could achieve the creation of norms only with
supernatural help. Norms, he taught, are superimposed upon the
original or natural state of affairs by man, but with the help of
Zeus. It is at Zeus’ bidding that Hermes gives to men an
understanding of justice and honour; and he distributes this gift to
all men equally. The way in which the first clear statement of
critical dualism makes room for a religious interpretation of our
sense of responsibility shows how little critical dualism is opposed

to a religious attitude. A similar approach can be discerned, I
believe, in the historical Socrates (see chapter 10) who felt
compelled, by his conscience as well as by his religious beliefs, to
question all authority, and who searched for the norms in whose
justice he could trust. The doctrine of the autonomy of ethics is
independent of the problem of religion, but compatible with, or
perhaps even necessary for, any religion which respects individual
conscience.
IV
So much concerning the dualism of facts and decisions, or the
doctrine of the autonomy of ethics, first advocated by Protagoras
and Socrates8. It is, I believe, indispensable for a reasonable
understanding of our social environment. But of course this does
not mean that all’ social laws’, i.e. all regularities of our social life,
are normative and man imposed. On the contrary, there are
important natural laws of social life also. For these, the term
sociological laws seems appropriate. It is just the fact that in social
life we meet with both kinds of laws, natural and normative, which
makes it so important to distinguish them clearly.
In speaking of sociological laws or natural laws of social life, I
do not think so much of the alleged laws of evolution in which
historicists such as Plato are interested, although if there are any
such regularities of historical developments, their formulations
would certainly fall under the category of sociological laws. Nor
do I think so much of the laws of ‘human nature’, i.e. of
psychological and socio-psychological regularities of human
behaviour. I have in mind, rather, such laws as are formulated by
modern economic theories, for instance, the theory of international
trade, or the theory of the trade cycle. These and other important
sociological laws are connected with the functioning of social
institutions. (Cp. chapters 3 and 9.) These laws play a role in our
social life corresponding to the role played in mechanical
engineering by, say, the principle of the lever. For institutions, like
levers, are needed if we want to achieve anything which goes
beyond the power of our muscles. Like machines, institutions
multiply our power for good and evil. Like machines, they need
intelligent supervision by someone who understands their way of
functioning and, most of all, their purpose, since we cannot build
them so that they work entirely automatically. Furthermore, their
construction needs some knowledge of social regularities which

impose limitations upon what can be achieved by institutions9.
(These limitations are somewhat analogous, for instance, to the law
of conservation of energy, which amounts to the statement that we
cannot build a perpetual motion machine.) But fundamentally,
institutions arc always made by establishing the observance of
certain norms, designed with a certain aim in mind. This holds
especially for institutions which are consciously created; but even
those—the vast majority—which arise as the undesigned results of
human actions (cp. chapter 14) are the indirect results of purposive
actions of some kind or other; and their functioning depends,
largely, on the observance of norms. (Even mechanical engines are
made, as it were, not only of iron, but by combining iron and
norms; i.e. by transforming physical things, but according to
certain normative rules, namely their plan or design.) In
institutions, normative laws and sociological, i.e. natural, laws are
closely interwoven, and it is therefore impossible to understand the
functioning of institutions without being able to distinguish
between these two. (These remarks are intended to suggest certain
problems rather than to give solutions. More especially, the
analogy mentioned between institutions and machines must not be
interpreted as proposing the theory that institutions are machines—
in some essentialist sense. Of course they are not machines. And
although the thesis is here proposed that we may obtain useful and
interesting results if we ask ourselves whether an institution does
serve any purpose, and what purposes it may serve, it is not
asserted that every institution serves some definite purpose—its
essential purpose, as it were.)
V
As indicated before, there are many intermediate steps in the
development from a naive or magical monism to a critical dualism
which clearly realizes the distinction between norms and natural
laws. Most of these intermediate positions arise from the
misapprehension that if a norm is conventional or artificial, it must
be wholly arbitrary. To understand Plato’s position, which
combines elements of them all, it is necessary to make a survey of
the three most important of these intermediate positions. They are
(1) biological naturalism, (2) ethical or juridical positivism, and (3)
psychological or spiritual naturalism. It is interesting that every
one of these positions has been used for defending ethical views
which are radically opposed to each other; more especially, for

defending the worship of power, and for defending the rights of the
weak.
(1) Biological naturalism, or more precisely, the biological
form of ethical naturalism, is the theory that in spite of the fact that
moral laws and the laws of states are arbitrary, there are some
eternal unchanging laws of nature from which we can derive such
norms. Food habits, i.e. the number of meals, and the kind of food
taken, are an example of the arbitrariness of conventions, the
biological naturalist may argue; yet there are undoubtedly certain
natural laws in this field. For instance, a man will die if he takes
either insufficient or too much food. Thus it seems that just as
there are realities behind appearances, so behind our arbitrary
conventions there are some unchanging natural laws and especially
the laws of biology.
Biological naturalism has been used not only to defend
equalitarianism, but also to defend the anti-equalitarian doctrine of
the rule of the strong. One of the first to put forward this
naturalism was the poet Pindar, who used it to support the theory
that the strong should rule. He claimed10 that it is a law, valid
throughout nature, that the stronger does with the weaker whatever
he likes. Thus laws which protect the weak are not merely arbitrary
but artificial distortions of the true natural law that the strong
should be free and the weak should be his slave. The view is
discussed a good deal by Plato; it is attacked in the Gorgias, a
dialogue which is still much influenced by Socrates; in the
Republic, it is put in the mouth of Thrasymachus, and identified
with ethical individualism (see the next chapter); in the Laws, Plato
is less antagonistic to Pindar’s view; but he still contrasts it with
the rule of the wisest, which, he says, is a better principle, and just
as much in accordance with nature (see also the quotation later in
this chapter).
The first to put forward a humanitarian or equalitarian version
of biological naturalism was the Sophist Antiphon. To him is due
also the identification of nature with truth, and of convention with
opinion (or ‘delusive opinion’11). Antiphon is a radical naturalist.
He believes that most norms are not merely arbitrary, but directly
contrary to nature. Norms, he says, are imposed from outside,
while the rules of nature are inevitable. It is disadvantageous and
even dangerous to break man-imposed norms if the breach is
observed by those who impose them; but there is no inner
necessity attached to them, and nobody needs to be ashamed of

breaking them; shame and punishment are only sanctions
arbitrarily imposed from outside. On this criticism of conventional
morals, Antiphon bases a utilitarian ethics. ‘Of the actions here
mentioned, one would find many to be contrary to nature. For they
involve more suffering where there should be less, and less
pleasure where there could be more, and injury where it is
unnecessary.’12 At the same time, he taught the need for selfcontrol. His equalitarianism he formulates as follows: ‘The nobly
born we revere and adore; but not the lowly born. These are
barbarous habits. For as to our natural gifts, we are all on an equal
footing, on all points, whether we now happen to be Greeks or
Barbarians ... We all breathe the air through our mouths and
nostrils.’
A similar equalitarianism was voiced by the Sophist Hippias,
whom Plato represents as addressing his audience: ‘Gentlemen, I
believe that we are all kinsmen and friends and fellow-citizens; if
not by conventional law, then by nature. For by nature, likeness is
an expression of kinship; but conventional law, the tyrant of
mankind, compels us to do much that is against nature.’13 This
spirit was bound up with the Athenian movement against slavery
(mentioned in chapter 4) to which Euripides gave expression: ‘The
name alone brings shame upon the slave who can be excellent in
every way and truly equal to the free born man.’ Elsewhere, he
says: ‘Man’s law of nature is equality.’ And Alcidamas, a disciple
of Gorgias and a contemporary of Plato, wrote: ‘God has made all
men free; no man is a slave by nature.’ Similar views are also
expressed by Lycophron, another member of Gorgias’ school: ‘The
splendour of noble birth is imaginary, and its prerogatives are
based upon a mere word.’
Reacting against this great humanitarian movement—the
movement of the ‘Great Generation’, as I shall call it later (chapter
10)—Plato, and his disciple Aristotle, advanced the theory of the
biological and moral inequality of man. Greeks and barbarians are
unequal by nature; the opposition between them corresponds to
that between natural masters and natural slaves. The natural
inequality of men is one of the reasons for their living together, for
their natural gifts are complementary. Social life begins with
natural inequality, and it must continue upon that foundation. I
shall discuss these doctrines later in more detail. At present, they
may serve to show how biological naturalism can be used to
support the most divergent ethical doctrines. In the light of our

previous analysis of the impossibility of basing norms upon facts
this result is not unexpected.
Such considerations, however, are perhaps not sufficient to
defeat a theory as popular as biological naturalism; I therefore
propose two more direct criticisms. First, it must be admitted that
certain forms of behaviour may be described as more ‘natural’ than
other forms; for instance, going naked or eating only raw food; and
some people think that this in itself justifies the choice of these
forms. But in this sense it certainly is not natural to interest oneself
in art, or science, or even in arguments in favour of naturalism.
The choice of conformity with ‘nature’ as a supreme standard leads
ultimately to consequences which few will be prepared to face; it
does not lead to a more natural form of civilization, but to
beastliness14. The second criticism is more important. The
biological naturalist assumes that he can derive his norms from the
natural laws which determine the conditions of health, etc., if he
does not naively believe that we need adopt no norms whatever but
simply live according to the ‘laws of nature’. He overlooks the fact
that he makes a choice, a decision; that it is possible that some
other people cherish certain things more than their health (for
instance, the many who have consciously risked their lives for
medical research). And he is therefore mistaken if he believes that
he has not made a decision, or that he has derived his norms from
biological laws.
(2) Ethical positivism shares with the biological form of ethical
naturalism the belief that we must try to reduce norms to facts. But
the facts are this time sociological facts, namely, the actual existing
norms. Positivism maintains that there are no other norms but the
laws which have actually been set up (or ‘posited’) and which have
therefore a positive existence. Other standards are considered as
unreal imaginations. The existing laws are the only possible
standards of goodness: what is, is good. (Might is right.)
According to some forms of this theory, it is a gross
misunderstanding to believe that the individual can judge the
norms of society; rather, it is society which provides the code by
which the individual must be judged.
As a matter of historical fact, ethical (or moral, or juridical)
positivism has usually been conservative, or even authoritarian;
and it has often invoked the authority of God. Its arguments
depend, I believe, upon the alleged arbitrariness of norms. We
must believe in existing norms, it claims, because there are no

better norms which we may find for ourselves. In reply to this it
might be asked: What about this norm ‘We must believe etc.’? If
this is only an existing norm, then it does not count as an argument
in favour of these norms; but if it is an appeal to our insight, then it
admits that we can, after all, find norms ourselves. And if we are
told to accept norms on authority because we cannot judge them,
then neither can we judge whether the claims of the authority are
justified, or whether we may not follow a false prophet. And if it is
held that there are no false prophets because laws are arbitrary
anyhow, so that the main thing is to have some laws, then we may
ask ourselves why it should be so important to have laws at all; for
if there are no further standards, why then should we not choose to
have no laws? (These remarks may perhaps indicate the reasons for
my belief that authoritarian or conservative principles are usually
an expression of ethical nihilism; that is to say, of an extreme
moral scepticism, of a distrust of man and of his possibilities.)
While the theory of natural rights has, in the course of history,
often been proffered in support of equalitarian and humanitarian
ideas, the positivist school was usually in the opposite camp. But
this is not much more than an accident. As has been shown, ethical
naturalism may be used with very different intentions. (It has
recently been used for confusing the whole issue by advertising
certain allegedly ‘natural’ rights and obligations as ‘natural laws’.)
Conversely, there are also humanitarian and progressive
positivists. For if all norms are arbitrary, why not be tolerant? This
is a typical attempt to justify a humanitarian attitude along
positivist lines.
(3) Psychological or spiritual naturalism is in a way a
combination of the two previous views, and it can best be
explained by means of an argument against the one-sidedness of
these views. The ethical positivist is right, this argument runs, if he
emphasizes that all norms are conventional, i.e. a product of man,
and of human society; but he overlooks the fact that they are
therefore an expression of the psychological or spiritual nature of
man, and of the nature of human society. The biological naturalist
is right in assuming that there are certain natural aims or ends,
from which we can derive natural norms; but he overlooks the fact
that our natural aims are not necessarily such aims as health,
pleasure, or food, shelter or propagation. Human nature is such that
man, or at least some men, do not want to live by bread alone, that
they seek higher aims, spiritual aims. We may thus derive man’s

true natural aims from his own true nature, which is spiritual, and
social. And we may, further, derive the natural norms of life from
his natural ends.
This plausible position was, I believe, first formulated by Plato,
who was here under the influence of the Socratic doctrine of the
soul, i.e. of Socrates’ teaching that the spirit matters more than the
flesh15. Its appeal to our sentiments is undoubtedly very much
stronger than that of the other two positions. It can however be
combined, like these, with any ethical decision; with a
humanitarian attitude as well as with the worship of power. For we
can, for instance, decide to treat all men as participating in this
spiritual human nature; or we can insist like Heraclitus, that the
many ‘fill their bellies like the beasts’, and are therefore of an
inferior nature, and that only a few elect ones are worthy of the
spiritual community of men. Accordingly, spiritual naturalism has
been much used, and especially by Plato, to justify the natural
prerogatives of the ‘noble’ or ‘elect’ or’ wise ‘or of the ‘natural
leader’. (Plato’s attitude is discussed in the following chapters.) On
the other hand, it has been used by Christian and other16
humanitarian forms of ethics, for instance by Paine and by Kant, to
demand the recognition of the ‘natural rights’ of every human
individual. It is clear that spiritual naturalism can be used to defend
any ‘positive’, i.e. existing, norm. For it can always be argued that
these norms would not be in force if they did not express some
traits of human nature. In this way, spiritual naturalism can, in
practical problems, become one with positivism, in spite of their
traditional opposition. In fact, this form of naturalism is so wide
and so vague that it may be used to defend anything. There is
nothing that has ever occurred to man which could not be claimed
to be ‘natural’; for if it were not in his nature, how could it have
occurred to him?
Looking back at this brief survey, we may perhaps discern two
main tendencies which stand in the way of adopting a critical
dualism. The first is a general tendency towards monism17, that is
to say, towards the reduction of norms to facts. The second lies
deeper, and it possibly forms the background of the first. It is based
upon our fear of admitting to ourselves that the responsibility for
our ethical decisions is entirely ours and cannot be shifted to
anybody else; neither to God, nor to nature, nor to society, nor to
history. All these ethical theories attempt to find somebody, or
perhaps some argument, to take the burden from us18. But we

cannot shirk this responsibility. Whatever authority we may accept,
it is we who accept it. We only deceive ourselves if we do not
realize this simple point.
VI
We now turn to a more detailed analysis of Plato’s naturalism
and its relation to his historicism. Plato, of course, does not always
use the term ‘nature’ in the same sense. The most important
meaning which he attaches to it is, I believe, practically identical
with that which he attaches to the term ‘essence’. This way of
using the term ‘nature’ still survives among essentialists even in
our day; they still speak, for instance, of the nature of mathematics,
or of the nature of inductive inference, or of the ‘nature of
happiness and misery’19. When used by Plato in this way, ‘nature’
means nearly the same as ‘Form’ or ‘Idea’; for the Form or Idea of
a thing, as shown above, is also its essence. The main difference
between natures and Forms or Ideas seems to be this. The Form or
Idea of a sensible thing is, as we have seen, not in that thing, but
separated from it; it is its forefather, its primogenitor; but this Form
or father passes something on to the sensible things which are its
offspring or race, namely, their nature. This ‘nature’ is thus the
inborn or original quality of a thing, and in so far, its inherent
essence; it is the original power or disposition of a thing, and it
determines those of its properties which are the basis of its
resemblance to, or of its innate participation in, its Form or Idea.
‘Natural’ is, accordingly, what is innate or original or divine in
a thing, while ‘artificial’ is that which has been later changed by
man or added or imposed by him, through external compulsion.
Plato frequently insists that all products of human ‘art’ at their best
are only copies of ‘natural’ sensible things. But since these in turn
are only copies of the divine Forms or Ideas, the products of art are
only copies of copies, twice removed from reality, and therefore
less good, less real, and less true20 than even the (natural) things in
flux. We see from this that Plato agrees with Antiphon21 in at least
one point, namely in assuming that the opposition between nature
and convention or art corresponds to that between truth and
falsehood, between reality and appearance, between primary or
original and secondary or man-made things, and to that between
the objects of rational knowledge and those of delusive opinion.
The opposition corresponds also, according to Plato, to that
between ‘the offspring of divine workmanship’ or ‘the products of

divine art’, and ‘what man makes out of them, i.e. the products of
human art’.22 All those things whose intrinsic value Plato wishes to
emphasize he therefore claims to be natural as opposed to artificial.
Thus he insists in the Laws that the soul has to be considered prior
to all material things, and that it must therefore be said to exist by
nature: ‘Nearly everybody .. is ignorant of the power of the soul,
and especially of her origin. They do not know that she is among
the first of things, and prior to all bodies ... In using the word
“nature” one wants to describe the things that were created first;
but if it turns out that it is the soul which is prior to other things
(and not, perhaps, fire or air),.. then the soul, beyond all others,
may be asserted to exist by nature, in the truest sense of the
word.’23 (Plato here re-affirms his old theory that the soul is more
closely akin to the Forms or Ideas than the body; a theory which is
also the basis of his doctrine of immortality.)
But Plato not only teaches that the soul is prior to other things
and therefore exists ‘by nature’; he uses the term ‘nature’, if
applied to man, frequently also as a name for spiritual powers or
gifts or natural talents, so that we can say that a man’s ‘nature’ is
much the same as his ‘soul’; it is the divine principle by which he
participates in the Form or Idea, in the divine primogenitor of his
race. And the term ‘race’, again, is frequently used in a very
similar sense. Since a ‘race’ is united by being the offspring of the
same primogenitor, it must also be united by a common nature.
Thus the terms ‘nature’ and ‘race’ are frequently used by Plato as
synonyms, for instance, when he speaks of the ‘race of
philosophers’ and of those who have ‘philosophic natures’; so that
both these terms are closely akin to the terms ‘essence’ and ‘soul’.
Plato’s theory of ‘nature’ opens another approach to his
historicist methodology. Since it seems to be the task of science in
general to examine the true nature of its objects, it is the task of a
social or political science to examine the nature of human society,
and of the state. But the nature of a thing, according to Plato, is its
origin; or at least it is determined by its origin. Thus the method of
any science will be the investigation of the origin of things (of their
‘causes’). This principle, when applied to the science of society
and of politics, leads to the demand that the origin of society and of
the state must be examined. History therefore is not studied for its
own sake but serves as the method of the social sciences. This is
the historicist methodology.

What is the nature of human society, of the state? According to
historicist methods, this fundamental question of sociology must
be reformulated in this way: what is the origin of society and of the
state? The reply given by Plato in the Republic as well as in the
Laws24, agrees with the position described above as spiritual
naturalism. The origin of society is a convention, a social contract.
But it is not only that; it is, rather, a natural convention, i.e. a
convention which is based upon human nature, and more precisely,
upon the social nature of man.
This social nature of man has its origin, in the imperfection of
the human individual. In opposition to Socrates25, Plato teaches
that the human individual cannot be self-sufficient, owing to the
limitations inherent in human nature. Although Plato insists that
there are very different degrees of human perfection, it turns out
that even the very few comparatively perfect men still depend upon
others (who are less perfect); if for nothing else, then for having
the dirty work, the manual work, done by them26. In this way, even
the ‘rare and uncommon natures’ who approach perfection depend
upon society, upon the state. They can reach perfection only
through the state and in the state; the perfect state must offer them
the proper ‘social habitat’, without which they must grow corrupt
and degenerate. The state therefore must be placed higher than the
individual since only the state can be self-sufficient (‘autark’),
perfect, and able to make good the necessary imperfection of the
individual.
Society and the individual are thus interdependent. The one
owes its existence to the other. Society owes its existence to human
nature, and especially to its lack of self-sufficiency; and the
individual owes his existence to society, since he is not selfsufficient. But within this relationship of interdependence, the
superiority of the state over the individual manifests itself in
various ways; for instance, in the fact that the seed of the decay
and disunion of a perfect state does not spring up in the state itself,
but rather in its individuals; it is rooted in the imperfection of the
human soul, of human nature; or more precisely, in the fact that the
race of men is liable to degenerate. To this point, the origin of
political decay, and its dependence upon the degeneration of
human nature, I shall return presently; but I wish first to make a
few comments on some of the characteristics of Plato’s sociology,
especially upon his version of the theory of the social contract, and

upon his view of the state as a super-individual, i.e. his version of
the biological or organic theory of the state.
Whether Protagoras first proposed a theory that laws originate
with a social contract, or whether Lycophron (whose theory will be
discussed in the next chapter) was the first to do so, is not certain.
In any case, the idea is closely related to Protagoras’
conventionalism. The fact that Plato consciously combined some
conventionalist ideas, and even a version of the contract theory,
with his naturalism, is in itself an indication that conventionalism
in its original form did not maintain that laws are wholly arbitrary;
and Plato’s remarks on Protagoras confirm this27. How conscious
Plato was of a conventionalist element in his version of naturalism
can be seen from a passage in the Laws. Plato there gives a list of
the various principles upon which political authority might be
based, mentioning Pindar’s biological naturalism (see above), i.e.
‘the principle that the stronger shall rule and the weaker be ruled’,
which he describes as a principle ‘according to nature, as the
Theban poet Pindar once stated’. Plato contrasts this principle with
another which he recommends by showing that it combines
conventionalism with naturalism: ‘But there is also a .. claim
which is the greatest principle of all, namely, that the wise shall
lead and rule, and that the ignorant shall follow; and this, O Pindar,
wisest of poets, is surely not contrary to nature, but according to
nature; for what it demands is not external compulsion but the truly
natural sovereignty of a law which is based upon mutual
consent.’28
In the Republic we find elements of the conventionalist
contract theory in a similar way combined with elements of
naturalism (and utilitarianism). ‘The city originates’, we hear there,
‘because we are not self-sufficient;.. or is there another origin of
settlement in cities?.. Men gather into one settlement many ..
helpers, since they need many things ... And when they share their
goods with one another, the one giving, the other partaking, does
not every one expect in this way to further his own interest?’29
Thus the inhabitants gather in order that each may further his own
interest; which is an element of the contract theory. But behind this
stands the fact that they are not self-sufficient, a fact of human
nature; which is an element of naturalism. And this element is
developed further. ‘By nature, no two of us are exactly alike. Each
has his peculiar nature, some being fit for one kind of work and
some for another ... Is it better that a man should work in many

crafts or that he should work in one only?.. Surely, more will be
produced and better and more easily if each man works in one
occupation only, according to his natural gifts.’
In this way, the economic principle of the division of labour is
introduced (reminding us of the affinity between Plato’s
historicism and the materialist interpretation of history). But this
principle is based here upon an element of biological naturalism,
namely, upon the natural inequality of men. At first, this idea is
introduced inconspicuously and, as it were, innocently. But we
shall see in the next chapter that it has far-reaching consequences;
indeed, the only really important division of labour turns out to be
that between rulers and ruled, claimed to be based upon the natural
inequality of masters and slaves, of wise and ignorant.
We have seen that there is a considerable element of
conventionalism as well as of biological naturalism in Plato’s
position; an observation which is not surprising when we consider
that this position is, on the whole, that of spiritual naturalism
which, because of its vagueness, easily allows for all such
combinations. This spiritual version of naturalism is perhaps best
formulated in the Laws. ‘Men say’, says Plato, ‘that the greatest
and most beautiful things are natural .. and the lesser things
artificial.’ So far he agrees; but he then attacks the materialists who
say ‘that fire and water, and earth and air, all exist by nature .. and
that all normative laws are altogether unnatural and artificial and
based upon superstitions which are not true.’ Against this view, he
shows first, that it is not bodies nor elements, but the soul which
truly ‘exists by nature’30 (I have quoted this passage above); and
from this he concludes that order, and law, must also be by nature,
since they spring from the soul: ‘If the soul is prior to the body,
then things dependent upon the soul’ (i.e. spiritual matters) ‘are
also prior to those dependent upon body ... And the soul orders and
directs all things.’ This supplies the theoretical background for the
doctrine that ‘laws and purposeful institutions exist by nature, and
not by anything lower than nature, since they are born of reason
and true thought.’ This is a clear statement of spiritual naturalism;
and it is combined as well with positivist beliefs of a conservative
kind: ‘Thoughtful and prudent legislation will find a most powerful
help because the laws will remain unchanged once they have been
laid down in writing.’
From all this it can be seen that arguments derived from Plato’s
spiritual naturalism are quite incapable of helping to answer any

question which may arise concerning the ‘just’ or ‘natural’
character of any particular law. Spiritual naturalism is much too
vague to be applied to any practical problem. It cannot do much
beyond providing some general arguments in favour of
conservativism. In practice, everything is left to the wisdom of the
great lawgiver (a godlike philosopher, whose picture, especially in
the Laws, is undoubtedly a self-portrait; see also chapter 8). As
opposed to his spiritual naturalism, however, Plato’s theory of the
interdependence of society and the individual furnishes more
concrete results; and so does his anti-equalitarian biological
naturalism.
VII
It has been indicated above that because of its self-sufficiency,
the ideal state appears to Plato as the perfect individual, and the
individual citizen, accordingly, as an imperfect copy of the state.
This view which makes of the state a kind of super-organism or
Leviathan introduces into the Occident the so-called organic or
biological theory of the state. The principle of this theory will be
criticized later31. Here I wish first to draw attention to the fact that
Plato does not defend the theory, and indeed hardly formulates it
explicitly. But it is clearly enough implied; in fact, the fundamental
analogy between the state and the human individual is one of the
standard topics of the Republic. It is worth mentioning, in this
connection, that the analogy serves to further the analysis of the
individual rather than that of the state. One could perhaps defend
the view that Plato (perhaps under the influence of Alcmaeon) does
not offer so much a biological theory of the state as a political
theory of the human individual32. This view, I think, is fully in
accordance with his doctrine that the individual is lower than the
state, and a kind of imperfect copy of it. In the very place in which
Plato introduces his fundamental analogy, it is used in this way;
that is to say, as a method of explaining and elucidating the
individual. The city, it is said, is greater than the individual, and
therefore easier to examine. Plato gives this as his reason for
suggesting that ‘we should begin our inquiry’ (namely, into the
nature of justice) ‘in the city, and continue it afterwards in the
individual, always watching for points of similarity ... May we not
expect in this way to discern more easily what we are looking for?’
From his way of introducing it we can see that Plato (and
perhaps his readers) took his fundamental analogy for granted.

This may well be a symptom of nostalgia, of a longing for a
unified and harmonious, an ‘organic’ state: for a society of a more
primitive kind. (See chapter 10.) The city state ought to remain
small, he says, and should grow only as long as its increase does
not endanger its unity. The whole city should, by its nature, be one,
and not many.33 Plato thus emphasizes the ‘oneness’ or
individuality of his city. But he also emphasizes the ‘manyness’ of
the human individual. In his analysis of the individual soul, and of
its division into three parts, reason, energy, and animal instincts,
corresponding to the three classes of his state, the guardians,
warriors, and workers (who still continue to ‘fill their bellies like
the beasts’, as Heraclitus had said), Plato goes so far as to oppose
these parts to one another as if they were ‘distinct and conflicting
persons’34. ‘We are thus told’, says Grote, ‘that though man is
apparently One, he is in reality Many .. though the perfect
Commonwealth is apparently Many, it is in reality One.’ It is clear
that this corresponds to the Ideal character of the state of which the
individual is a kind of imperfect copy. Such an emphasis upon
oneness and wholeness—especially of the state; or perhaps of the
world—may be described as ‘holism’. Plato’s holism, I believe, is
closely related to the tribal collectivism mentioned in earlier
chapters. Plato was longing for the lost unity of tribal life. A life of
change, in the midst of a social revolution, appeared to him unreal.
Only a stable whole, the permanent collective, has reality, not the
passing individuals. It is ‘natural’ for the individual to subserve the
whole, which is no mere assembly of individuals, but a ‘natural’
unit of a higher order.
Plato gives many excellent sociological descriptions of this
‘natural’, i.e. tribal and collectivist, mode of social life: ‘The law’,
he writes in the Republic, ‘.. is designed to bring about the welfare
of the state as a whole, fitting the citizens into one unit, by means
of both persuasion and force. It makes them all share in whatever
benefit each of them can contribute to the community. And it is
actually the law which creates for the state men of the right frame
of mind; not for the purpose of letting them loose, so that
everybody can go his own way, but in order to utilize them all for
welding the city together.’35 That there is in this holism an
emotional aestheticism, a longing for beauty, can be seen, for
instance, from a remark in the Laws: ‘Every artist .. executes the
part for the sake of the whole, and not the whole for the sake of the
part.’ At the same place, we also find a truly classical formulation

of political holism: ‘You are created for the sake of the whole, and
not the whole for the sake of you.’ Within this whole, the different
individuals, and groups of individuals, with their natural
inequalities, must render their specific and very unequal services.
All this would indicate that Plato’s theory was a form of the
organic theory of the state, even if he had not sometimes spoken of
the state as an organism. But since he did this, there can be no
doubt left that he must be described as an exponent, or rather, as
one of the originators, of this theory. His version of this theory
may be characterized as a personalist or psychological one, since
he describes the state not in a general way as similar to some
organism or other, but as analogous to the human individual, and
more specifically to the human soul. Especially the disease of the
state, the dissolution of its unity, corresponds to the disease of the
human soul, of human nature. In fact, the disease of the state is not
only correlated with, but is directly produced by, the corruption of
human nature, more especially of the members of the ruling class.
Every single one of the typical stages in the degeneration of the
state is brought about by a corresponding stage in the degeneration
of the human soul, of human nature, of the human race. And since
this moral degeneration is interpreted as based upon racial
degeneration, we might say that the biological element in Plato’s
naturalism turns out, in the end, to have the most important part in
the foundation of his historicism. For the history of the downfall of
the first or perfect state is nothing but the history of the biological
degeneration of the race of men.
VIII
It was mentioned in the last chapter that the problem of the
beginning of change and decay is one of the major difficulties of
Plato’s historicist theory of society. The first, the natural and
perfect city-state, cannot be supposed to carry within itself the
germ of dissolution, ‘for a city which carries within itself the germ
of dissolution is for that very reason imperfect’36. Plato tries to get
over the difficulty by laying the blame on his universally valid
historical, biological, and perhaps even cosmological, evolutionary
law of degeneration, rather than on the particular constitution of
the first or perfect city37: ‘Everything that has been generated must
decay.’ But this general theory does not provide a fully satisfactory
solution, for it does not explain why even a sufficiently perfect
state cannot escape the law of decay. And indeed, Plato hints that

historical decay might have been avoided38, had the rulers of the
first or natural state been trained philosophers. But they were not.
They were not trained (as he demands that the rulers of his
heavenly city should be) in mathematics and dialectics; and in
order to avoid degeneration, they would have needed to be initiated
into the higher mysteries of eugenics, of the science of ‘keeping
pure the race of the guardians’, and of avoiding the mixture of the
noble metals in their veins with the base metals of the workers. But
these higher mysteries are difficult to reveal. Plato distinguishes
sharply, in the fields of mathematics, acoustics, and astronomy,
between mere (delusive) opinion which is tainted by experience,
and which cannot reach exactness, and is altogether on a low level,
and pure rational knowledge, which is free from sensual
experience and exact. This distinction he applies also to the field of
eugenics. A merely empirical art of breeding cannot be precise, i.e.
it cannot keep the race perfectly pure. This explains the downfall
of the original city which is so good, i.e. so similar to its Form or
Idea, that ‘a city thus constituted can hardly be shaken’. ‘But this’,
Plato continues, ‘is the way it dissolves’, and he proceeds to
outline his theory of breeding, of the Number, and of the Fall of
Man.
All plants and animals, he tells us, must be bred according to
definite periods of time, if barrenness and degeneration are to be
avoided. Some knowledge of these periods, which are connected
with the length of the life of the race, will be available to the rulers
of the best state, and they will apply it to the breeding of the master
race. It will not, however, be rational, but only empirical
knowledge; it will be ‘calculation aided by (or based on)
perception’ (cp. the next quotation). But as we have just seen,
perception and experience can never be exact and reliable, since its
objects are not the pure Forms or Ideas, but the world of things in
flux; and since the guardians have no better kind of knowledge at
their disposal, the breed cannot be kept pure, and racial
degeneration must creep in. This is how Plato explains the matter:
‘Concerning your own race’ (i.e. the race of men, as opposed to
animals), ‘the rulers of the city whom you have trained may be
wise enough; but since they are using calculation aided by
perception, they will not hit, accidentally, upon the way of getting
either good offspring, or none at all.’ Lacking a purely rational
method, 39 ‘they will blunder, and some day they will beget
children in the wrong way’. In what follows next, Plato hints,

rather mysteriously, that there is now a way to avoid this through
the discovery of a purely rational and mathematical science which
possesses in the ‘Platonic Number’ (a number determining the
True Period of the human race) the key to the master law of higher
eugenics. But since the guardians of old times were ignorant of
Pythagorean number-mysticism, and with it, of this key to the
higher knowledge of breeding, the otherwise perfect natural state
could not escape decay. After partially revealing the secret of his
mysterious Number, Plato continues: ‘This .. number is master
over better or worse births; and whenever these guardians of
yours—who are ignorant of these matters—unite bride and
bridegroom in the wrong manner40, the children will have neither
good natures nor good luck. Even the best of them .. will prove
unworthy when succeeding to the power of their fathers; and as
soon as they are guardians, they will not listen to us any more’—
that is, in matters of musical and gymnastic education, and, as
Plato especially emphasizes, in the supervision of breeding. ‘Hence
rulers will be appointed who are not altogether fit for their task as
guardians; namely to watch, and to test, the metals in the races
(which are Hesiod’s races as well as yours), gold and silver and
bronze and iron. So iron will mingle with silver and bronze with
gold and from this mixture, Variation will be born and absurd
Irregularity; and whenever these are born they will beget Strife and
Hostility. And this is how we must describe the ancestry and birth
of Dissension, wherever she arises.’
This is Plato’s story of the Number and of the Fall of Man. It is
the basis of his historicist sociology, especially of his fundamental
law of social revolutions discussed in the last chapter41. For racial
degeneration explains the origin of disunion in the ruling class, and
with it, the origin of all historical development. The internal
disunion of human nature, the schism of the soul, leads to the
schism of the ruling class. And as with Heraclitus, war, class war,
is the father and promoter of all change, and of the history of man,
which is nothing but the history of the breakdown of society. We
see that Plato’s idealist historicism ultimately rests not upon a
spiritual, but upon a biological basis; it rests upon a kind of metabiology42 of the race of men. Plato was not only a naturalist who
proffered a biological theory of the state, he was also the first to
proffer a biological and racial theory of social dynamics, of
political history. ‘The Platonic Number’, says Adam43, ‘is thus the
setting in which Plato’s “Philosophy of History” is framed.’

It is, I think, appropriate to conclude this sketch of Plato’s
descriptive sociology with a summary and an evaluation.
Plato succeeded in giving an astonishingly true, though of
course somewhat idealized, reconstruction of an early Greek tribal
and collectivist society similar to that of Sparta. An analysis of the
forces, especially the economic forces, which threaten the stability
of such a society, enables him to describe the general policy as
well as the social institutions which are necessary for arresting it.
And he gives, furthermore, a rational reconstruction of the
economic and historical development of the Greek city-states.
These achievements are impaired by his hatred of the society in
which he was living, and by his romantic love for the old tribal
form of social life. It is this attitude which led him to formulate an
untenable law of historical development, namely, the law of
universal degeneration or decay. And the same attitude is also
responsible for the irrational, fantastic, and romantic elements of
his otherwise excellent analysis. On the other hand, it was just his
personal interest and his partiality which sharpened his eye and so
made his achievements possible. He derived his historicist theory
from the fantastic philosophical doctrine that the changing visible
world is only a decaying copy of an unchanging invisible world.
But this ingenious attempt to combine a historicist pessimism with
an ontological optimism leads, when elaborated, to difficulties.
These difficulties forced upon him the adoption of a biological
naturalism, leading (together with ‘psychologism’44, i.e. the theory
that society depends on the ‘human nature’ of its members) to
mysticism and superstition, culminating in a pseudo-rational
mathematical theory of breeding. They even endangered the
impressive unity of his theoretical edifice.
IX
Looking back at this edifice, we may briefly consider its
ground-plan45. This ground-plan, conceived by a great architect,
exhibits a fundamental metaphysical dualism in Plato’s thought. In
the field of logic, this dualism presents itself as the opposition
between the universal and the particular. In the field of
mathematical speculation, it presents itself as the opposition
between the One and the Many. In the field of epistemology, it is
the opposition between rational knowledge based on pure thought,
and opinion based on particular experiences. In the field of
ontology, it is the opposition between the one, original, invariable,

and true, reality, and the many, varying, and delusive, appearances;
between pure being and becoming, or more precisely, changing. In
the field of cosmology, it is the opposition between that which
generates and that which is generated, and which must decay. In
ethics, it is the opposition between the good, i.e. that which
preserves, and the evil, i.e. that which corrupts. In politics, it is the
opposition between the one collective, the state, which may attain
perfection and autarchy, and the great mass of the people—the
many individuals, the particular men who must remain imperfect
and dependent, and whose particularity is to be suppressed for the
sake of the unity of the state (see the next chapter). And this whole
dualist philosophy, I believe, originated from the urgent wish to
explain the contrast between the vision of an ideal society, and the
hateful actual state of affairs in the social field—the contrast
between a stable society, and a society in the process of revolution.

Plato’s Political Programme
Chapter 6: Totalitarian Justice
The analysis of Plato’s sociology makes it easy to present his
political programme. His fundamental demands can be expressed
in either of two formulas, the first corresponding to his idealist
theory of change and rest, the second to his naturalism. The idealist
formula is: Arrest all political change! Change is evil, rest divine1.
All change can be arrested if the state is made an exact copy of its
original, i.e. of the Form or Idea of the city. Should it be asked how
this is practicable, we can reply with the naturalistic formula: Back
to nature! Back to the original state of our forefathers, the
primitive state founded in accordance with human nature, and
therefore stable; back to the tribal patriarchy of the time before the
Fall, to the natural class rule of the wise few over the ignorant
many.
I believe that practically all the elements of Plato’s political
programme can be derived from these demands. They are, in turn,
based upon his historicism; and they have to be combined with his
sociological doctrines concerning the conditions for the stability of
class rule. The principal elements I have in mind are:
(A) The strict division of the classes; i.e. the ruling class
consisting of herdsmen and watch-dogs must be strictly separated
from the human cattle.

(B) The identification of the fate of the state with that of the
ruling class; the exclusive interest in this class, and in its unity; and
subservient to this unity, the rigid rules for breeding and educating
this class, and the strict supervision and collectivization of the
interests of its members.
From these principal elements, others can be derived, for
instance the following:
(C) The ruling class has a monopoly of things like military
virtues and training, and of the right to carry arms and to receive
education of any kind; but it is excluded from any participation in
economic activities, and especially from earning money.
(D) There must be a censorship of all intellectual activities of
the ruling class, and a continual propaganda aiming at moulding
and unifying their minds. All innovation in education, legislation,
and religion must be prevented or suppressed.
(E) The state must be self-sufficient. It must aim at economic
autarchy; for otherwise the rulers would either be dependent upon
traders, or become traders themselves. The first of these
alternatives would undermine their power, the second their unity
and the stability of the state.
This programme can, I think, be fairly described as totalitarian.
And it is certainly founded upon a historicist sociology.
But is that all? Are there no other features of Plato’s
programme, elements which are neither totalitarian nor founded
upon historicism? What about Plato’s ardent desire for Goodness
and Beauty, or his love of Wisdom and of Truth? What about his
demand that the wise, the philosophers, should rule? What about
his hopes of making the citizens of his state virtuous as well as
happy? And what about his demand that the state should be
founded upon Justice? Even writers who criticize Plato believe that
his political doctrine, in spite of certain similarities, is clearly
distinguished from modern totalitarianism by these aims of his, the
happiness of the citizens, and the rule of justice. Grossman, for
instance, whose critical attitude can be gauged from his remark
that ‘Plato’s philosophy is the most savage and most profound
attack upon liberal ideas which history can show’2, seems still to
believe that Plato’s plan is ‘the building of a perfect state in which
every citizen is really happy’. Another example is Joad who
discusses the similarities between Plato’s programme and that of
fascism at some length, but who asserts that there are fundamental
differences, since in Plato’s best state ‘the ordinary man .. achieves

such happiness as appertains to his nature’, and since this state is
built upon the ideas of ‘an absolute good and an absolute justice’.
In spite of such arguments I believe that Plato’s political
programme, far from being morally superior to totalitarianism, is
fundamentally identical with it. I believe that the objections against
this view are based upon an ancient and deep-rooted prejudice in
favour of idealizing Plato. That Grossman has done much to point
out and to destroy this inclination may be seen from this statement:
‘Before the Great War .. Plato .. was rarely condemned outright as
a reactionary, resolutely opposed to every principle of the liberal
creed. Instead he was elevated to a higher rank,.. removed from
practical life, dreaming of a transcendent City of God.’3 Grossman
himself, however, is not free from that tendency which he so
clearly exposes. It is interesting that this tendency could persist for
such a long time in spite of the fact that Grote and Gomperz had
pointed out the reactionary character of some doctrines of the
Republic and the Laws. But even they did not see all the
implications of these doctrines; they never doubted that Plato was,
fundamentally, a humanitarian. And their adverse criticism was
ignored, or interpreted as a failure to understand and to appreciate
Plato who was by Christians considered a ‘Christian before Christ’,
and by revolutionaries a revolutionary. This kind of complete faith
in Plato is undoubtedly still dominant, and Field, for instance, finds
it necessary to warn his readers that ‘we shall misunderstand Plato
entirely if we think of him as a revolutionary thinker’. This is, of
course, very true; and it would clearly be pointless if the tendency
to make of Plato a revolutionary thinker, or at least a progressivist,
were not fairly widespread. But Field himself has the same kind of
faith in Plato; for when he goes on to say that Plato was ‘in strong
opposition to the new and subversive tendencies’ of his time, then
surely he accepts too readily Plato’s testimony for the
subversiveness of these new tendencies. The enemies of freedom
have always charged its defenders with subversion. And nearly
always they have succeeded in persuading the guileless and wellmeaning.
The idealization of the great idealist permeates not only the
interpretations of Plato’s writings, but also the translations. Drastic
remarks of Plato’s which do not fit the translator’s views of what a
humanitarian should say are frequently either toned down or
misunderstood. This tendency begins with the translation of the
very title of Plato’s so-called ‘Republic’. What comes first to our

mind when hearing this title is that the author must be a liberal, if
not a revolutionary. But the title ‘Republic’ is, quite simply, the
English form of the Latin rendering of a Greek word that had no
associations of this kind, and whose proper English translation
would be ‘The Constitution’ or ‘The City State’ or ‘The State’. The
traditional translation ‘The Republic’ has undoubtedly contributed
to the general conviction that Plato could not have been a
reactionary.
In view of all that Plato says about Goodness and Justice and
the other Ideas mentioned, my thesis that his political demands are
purely totalitarian and anti-humanitarian needs to be defended. In
order to undertake this defence, I shall, for the next four chapters,
break off the analysis of historicism, and concentrate upon a
critical examination of the ethical Ideas mentioned, and of their
part in Plato’s political demands. In the present chapter, I shall
examine the Idea of Justice; in the three following chapters, the
doctrine that the wisest and best should rule, and the Ideas of
Truth, Wisdom, Goodness, and Beauty.
I
What do we really mean when we speak of ‘Justice’? I do not
think that verbal questions of this kind are particularly important,
or that it is possible to make a definite answer to them, since such
terms are always used in various senses. However, I think that
most of us, especially those whose general outlook is
humanitarian, mean something like this: (a) an equal distribution
of the burden of citizenship, i.e. of those limitations of freedom
which are necessary in social life4; (b) equal treatment of the
citizens before the law, provided, of course, that (c) the laws show
neither favour nor disfavour towards individual citizens or groups
or classes; (d) impartiality of the courts of justice; and (e) an equal
share in the advantages (and not only in the burden) which
membership of the state may offer to its citizens. If Plato had
meant by ‘justice’ anything of this kind, then my claim that his
programme is purely totalitarian would certainly be wrong and all
those would be right who believe that Plato’s politics rested upon
an acceptable humanitarian basis. But the fact is that he meant by
‘justice’ something entirely different. What did Plato mean by
‘justice’? I assert that in the Republic he used the term ‘just’ as a
synonym for ‘that which is in the interest of the best state’. And
what is in the interest of this best state? To arrest all change, by the

maintenance of a rigid class division and class rule. If I am right in
this interpretation, then we should have to say that Plato’s demand
for justice leaves his political programme at the level of
totalitarianism; and we should have to conclude that we must guard
against the danger of being impressed by mere words.
Justice is the central topic of the Republic; in fact, ‘On Justice’
is its traditional sub-title. In his enquiry into the nature of justice,
Plato makes use of the method mentioned5 in the last chapter; he
first tries to search for this Idea in the state, and then attempts to
apply the result to the individual. One cannot say that Plato’s
question ‘What is justice?’ quickly finds an answer, for it is only
given in the Fourth Book. The considerations which lead up to it
will be analysed more fully later in this chapter. Briefly, they are
these.
The city is founded upon human nature, its needs, and its
limitations6. ‘We have stated, and, you will remember, repeated
over and over again that each man in our city should do one work
only; namely, that work for which his nature is naturally best
fitted.’ From this Plato concludes that everyone should mind his
own business, that the carpenter should confine himself to
carpentering, the shoemaker to making shoes. Not much harm is
done, however, if two workers change their natural places. ‘But
should anyone who is by nature a worker (or else a member of the
money-earning class).. manage to get into the warrior class; or
should a warrior get into the class of the guardians, without being
worthy of it;.. then this kind of change and of underhand plotting
would mean the downfall of the city.’ From this argument which is
closely related to the principle that the carrying of arms should be a
class prerogative, Plato draws his final conclusion that any
changing or intermingling within the three classes must be
injustice, and that the opposite, therefore, is justice: ‘When each
class in the city minds its own business, the money-earning class as
well as the auxiliaries and the guardians, then this will be justice.’
This conclusion is reaffirmed and summed up a little later: ‘The
city is just .. if each of its three classes attends to its own work.’
But this statement means that Plato identifies justice with the
principle of class rule and of class privilege. For the principle that
every class should attend to its own business means, briefly and
bluntly, that the state is just if the ruler rules, if the worker works,
and7 if the slave slaves. It will be seen that Plato’s concept of
justice is fundamentally different from our ordinary view as

analysed above. Plato calls class privilege ‘just’, while we usually
mean by justice rather the absence of such privilege. But the
difference goes further than that. We mean by justice some kind of
equality in the treatment of individuals, while Plato considers
justice not as a relationship between individuals, but as a property
of the whole state, based upon a relationship between its classes.
The state is just if it is healthy, strong, united—stable.
II
But was Plato perhaps right? Does ‘justice’ perhaps mean what
he says? I do not intend to discuss such a question. If anyone
should hold that ‘justice’ means the unchallenged rule of one class,
then I should simply reply that I am all for injustice. In other
words, I believe that nothing depends upon words, and everything
upon our practical demands or upon the proposals for framing our
policy which we decide to adopt. Behind Plato’s definition of
justice stands, fundamentally, his demand for a totalitarian class
rule, and his decision to bring it about.
But was he not right in a different sense? Did his idea of justice
perhaps correspond to the Greek way of using this word? Did the
Greeks perhaps mean by ‘justice’, something holistic, like the
‘health of the state’, and is it not utterly unfair and unhistorical to
expect from Plato an anticipation of our modern idea of justice as
equality of the citizens before the law? This question, indeed, has
been answered in the affirmative, and the claim has been made that
Plato’s holistic idea of ‘social justice’ is characteristic of the
traditional Greek outlook, of the ‘Greek genius’ which ‘was not,
like the Roman, specifically legal’, but rather ‘specifically
metaphysical’8. But this claim is untenable. As a matter of fact, the
Greek way of using the word ‘justice’ was indeed surprisingly
similar to our own individualistic and equalitarian usage.
In order to show this, I may first refer to Plato himself who, in
the dialogue Gorgias (which is earlier than the Republic), speaks
of the view that’ justice is equality’ as one held by the great mass
of the people, and as one which agrees not only with ‘convention’,
but with ‘nature itself’. I may further quote Aristotle, another
opponent of equalitarianism, who, under the influence of Plato’s
naturalism, elaborated among other things the theory that some
men are by nature born to slave9. Nobody could be less interested
in spreading an equalitarian and individualistic interpretation of the
term ‘justice’. But when speaking of the judge, whom he describes

as ‘a personification of that which is just’, Aristotle says that it is
the task of the judge to ‘restore equality’. He tells us that ‘all men
think justice to be a kind of equality’, an equality, namely, which
‘pertains to persons’. He even thinks (but here he is wrong) that the
Greek word for ‘justice’ is to be derived from a root that means’
equal division’. (The view that ‘justice’ means a kind of equality in
the division of spoils and honours to the citizens’ agrees with
Plato’s views in the Laws, where two kinds of equality in the
distribution of spoils and honours are distinguished—‘numerical’
or ‘arithmetical’ equality and ‘proportionate’ equality; the second
of which takes account of the degree in which the persons in
question possess virtue, breeding, and wealth—and where this
proportionate equality is said to constitute ‘political justice’.) And
when Aristotle discusses the principles of democracy, he says that
‘democratic justice is the application of the principle of
arithmetical equality (as distinct from proportionate equality)’. All
this is certainly not merely his personal impression of the meaning
of justice, nor is it perhaps only a description of the way in which
the word was used, after Plato, under the influence of the Gorgias
and the Laws’, it is, rather, the expression of a universal and
ancient as well as popular use of the word ‘justice’.10
In view of this evidence, we must say, I think, that the holistic
and anti-equalitarian interpretation of justice in the Republic was
an innovation, and that Plato attempted to present his totalitarian
class rule as ‘just’ while people generally meant by ‘justice’ the
exact opposite.
This result is startling, and opens up a number of questions.
Why did Plato claim, in the Republic, that justice meant inequality
if in general usage, it meant equality? To me the only likely reply
seems to be that he wanted to make propaganda for his totalitarian
state by persuading the people that it was the ‘just’ state. But was
such an attempt worth his while, considering that it is not words
but what we mean by them that matters? Of course it was worth
while; this can be seen from the fact that he fully succeeded in
persuading his readers, down to our own day, that he was candidly
advocating justice, i.e. that justice they were striving for. And it is
a fact that he thereby spread doubt and confusion among
equalitarians and individualists who, under the influence of his
authority, began to ask themselves whether his idea of justice was
not truer and better than theirs. Since the word ‘justice’ symbolizes
to us an aim of such importance, and since so many are prepared to

endure anything for it, and to do all in their power for its
realization, the enlistment of these humanitarian forces, or at least,
the paralysing of equalitarianism, was certainly an aim worthy of
being pursued by a believer in totalitarianism. But was Plato aware
that justice meant so much to men? He was; for he writes in the
Republic: ‘When a man has committed an injustice,.. is it not true
that his courage refuses to be stirred?.. But when he believes that
he has suffered injustice, does not his vigour and his wrath flare up
at once? And is it not equally true that when fighting on the side of
what he believes to be just, he can endure hunger and cold, and any
kind of hardship? And does he not hold on until he conquers,
persisting in his exalted state until he has either achieved his aim,
or perished?’11
Reading this, we cannot doubt that Plato knew the power of
faith, and, above all, of a faith in justice. Nor can we doubt that the
Republic must tend to pervert this faith, and to replace it by a
directly opposite faith. And in the light of the available evidence, it
seems to me most probable that Plato knew very well what he was
doing. Equalitarianism was his arch-enemy, and he was out to
destroy it; no doubt in the sincere belief that it was a great evil and
a great danger. But his attack upon equalitarianism was not an
honest attack. Plato did not dare to face the enemy openly.
I proceed to present the evidence in support of this contention.
III
The Republic is probably the most elaborate monograph on
justice ever written. It examines a variety of views about justice,
and it does this in a way which leads us to believe that Plato
omitted none of the more important theories known to him. In fact,
Plato clearly implies12 that because of his vain attempts to track it
down among the current views, a new search for justice is
necessary. Yet in his survey and discussion of the current theories,
the view that justice is equality before the law (‘isonomy’) is never
mentioned. This omission can be explained only in two ways.
Either he overlooked the equalitarian theory13, or he purposely
avoided it. The first possibility seems very unlikely if we consider
the care with which the Republic is composed, and the necessity
for Plato to analyse the theories of his opponents if he was to make
a forceful presentation of his own. But this possibility appears even
more improbable if we consider the wide popularity of the
equalitarian theory. We need not, however, rely upon merely

probable arguments since it can be easily shown that Plato was not
only acquainted with the equalitarian theory but well aware of its
importance when he wrote the Republic. As already mentioned in
this chapter (in section II), and as will be shown in detail later (in
section VIII), equalitarianism played a considerable role in the
earlier Gorgias where it is even defended; and in spite of the fact
that the merits or demerits of equalitarianism are nowhere
seriously discussed in the Republic, Plato did not change his mind
regarding its influence, for the Republic itself testifies to its
popularity. It is there alluded to as a very popular democratic
belief; but it is treated only with scorn, and all we hear about it
consists of a few sneers and pin-pricks14, well matched with the
abusive attack upon Athenian democracy, and made at a place
where justice is not the topic of the discussion. The possibility that
the equalitarian theory of justice was overlooked by Plato is
therefore ruled out, and so is the possibility that he did not see that
a discussion of an influential theory diametrically opposed to his
own was requisite. The fact that his silence in the Republic is
broken only by a few jocular remarks (apparently he thought them
too good to be suppressed15) can be explained only as a conscious
refusal to discuss it. In view of all that, I do not see how Plato’s
method of impressing upon his readers the belief that all important
theories have been examined can be reconciled with the standards
of intellectual honesty; though we must add that his failure is
undoubtedly due to his complete devotion to a cause in whose
goodness he firmly believed.
In order to appreciate fully the implications of Plato’s
practically unbroken silence on this issue, we must first see clearly
that the equalitarian movement as Plato knew it represented all he
hated, and that his own theory, in the Republic and in all later
works, was largely a reply to the powerful challenge of the new
equalitarianism and humanitarianism. To show this, I shall discuss
the main principles of the humanitarian movement, and contrast
them with the corresponding principles of Platonic totalitarianism.
The humanitarian theory of justice makes three main demands
or proposals, namely (a) the equalitarian principle proper, i.e. the
proposal to eliminate ‘natural’ privileges, (b) the general principle
of individualism, and (c) the principle that it should be the task and
the purpose of the state to protect the freedom of its citizens. To
each of these political demands or proposals there corresponds a
directly opposite principle of Platonism, namely (a1) the principle

of natural privilege, (41) the general principle of holism or
collectivism, and (c1) the principle that it should be the task and the
purpose of the individual to maintain, and to strengthen, the
stability of the state.—I shall discuss these three points in order,
devoting to each of them one of the sections iv, v, and vi of this
chapter.
IV
Equalitarianism proper is the demand that the citizens of the
state should be treated impartially. It is the demand that birth,
family connection, or wealth must not influence those who
administer the law to the citizens. In other words, it does not
recognize any ‘natural’ privileges, although certain privileges may
be conferred by the citizens upon those they trust.
This equalitarian principle had been admirably formulated by
Pericles a few years before Plato’s birth, in an oration which has
been preserved by Thucydides16. It will be quoted more fully in
chapter 10, but two of its sentences may be given here: ‘Our laws’,
said Pericles, ‘afford equal justice to all alike in their private
disputes, but we do not ignore the claims of excellence. When a
citizen distinguishes himself, then he is preferred to the public
service, not as a matter of privilege, but as a reward for merit; and
poverty is not a bar ...’ These sentences express some of the
fundamental aims of the great equalitarian movement which, as we
have seen, did not even shrink from attacking slavery. In Pericles’
own generation, this movement was represented by Euripides,
Antiphon, and Hippias, who have all been quoted in the last
chapter, and also by Herodotus17. In Plato’s generation, it was
represented by Alcidamas and Lycophron, both quoted above;
another supporter was Antisthenes, who had been one of Socrates’
closest friends.
Plato’s principle of justice was, of course, diametrically
opposed to all this. He demanded natural privileges for the natural
leaders. But how did he contest the equalitarian principle? And
how did he establish his own demands?
It will be remembered from the last chapter that some of the
best-known formulations of the equalitarian demands were
couched in the impressive but questionable language of ‘natural
rights’, and that some of their representatives argued in favour of
these demands by pointing out the ‘natural’, i.e. biological,
equality of men. We have seen that the argument is irrelevant; that

men are equal in some important respects, and unequal in others;
and that normative demands cannot be derived from this fact, or
from any other fact. It is therefore interesting to note that the
naturalist argument was not used by all equalitarians, and that
Pericles, for one, did not even allude to it18.
Plato quickly found that naturalism was a weak spot within the
equalitarian doctrine, and he took the fullest advantage of this
weakness. To tell men that they are equal has a certain sentimental
appeal. But this appeal is small compared with that made by a
propaganda that tells them that they are superior to others, and that
others are inferior to them. Are you naturally equal to your
servants, to your slaves, to the manual worker who is no better than
an animal? The very question is ridiculous! Plato seems to have
been the first to appreciate the possibilities of this reaction, and to
oppose contempt, scorn, and ridicule to the claim to natural
equality. This explains why he was anxious to impute the
naturalistic argument even to those of his opponents who did not
use it; in the Menexenus, a parody of Pericles’ oration, he therefore
insists on linking together the claims to equal laws and to natural
equality: ‘The basis of our constitution is equality of birth’, he says
ironically. ‘We are all brethren, and are all children of one
mother;.. and the natural equality of birth induces us to strive for
equality before the law.’19
Later, in the Laws, Plato summarizes his reply to
equalitarianism in the formula: ‘Equal treatment of unequals must
beget inequity’20; and this was developed by Aristotle into the
formula ‘Equality for equals, inequality for unequals’. This
formula indicates what may be termed the standard objection to
equalitarianism; the objection that equality would be excellent if
only men were equal, but that it is manifestly impossible since they
are not equal, and since they cannot be made equal. This
apparently very realistic objection is, in fact, most unrealistic, for
political privileges have never been founded upon natural
differences of character. And, indeed, Plato does not seem to have
had much confidence in this objection when writing the Republic,
for it is used there only in one of his sneers at democracy when he
says that it ‘distributes equality to equals and unequals alike.’21
Apart from this remark, he prefers not to argue against
equalitarianism, but to forget it.
Summing up, it can be said that Plato never underrated the
significance of the equalitarian theory, supported as it was by a

man like Pericles, but that, in the Republic, he did not treat it at all;
he attacked it, but not squarely and openly.
But how did he try to establish his own anti-equalitarianism,
his principle of natural privilege? In the Republic, he proffered
three different arguments, though two of them hardly deserve the
name. The first22 is the surprising remark that, since all the other
three virtues of the state have been examined, the remaining fourth,
that of ‘minding one’s own business’, must be ‘justice’. I am
reluctant to believe that this was meant as an argument; but it must
be, for Plato’s leading speaker, ‘Socrates’, introduces it by asking:
‘Do you know how I arrive at this conclusion?’ The second
argument is more interesting, for it is an attempt to show that his
anti-equalitarianism can be derived from the ordinary (i.e.
equalitarian) view that justice is impartiality. I quote the passage in
full. Remarking that the rulers of the city will also be its judges,
‘Socrates’ says23: ‘And will it not be the aim of their jurisdiction
that no man shall take what belongs to another, and shall be
deprived of what is his own?’—‘Yes’, is the reply of ‘Glaucon’,
the interlocutor, ‘that will be their intention.’—‘Because that
would be just?’—‘Yes.’—‘Accordingly, to keep and to practise
what belongs to us and is our own will be generally agreed upon to
be justice.’ Thus it is established that ‘to keep and to practise what
is one’s own’ is the principle of just jurisdiction, according to our
ordinary ideas of justice. Here the second argument ends, giving
way to the third (to be analysed below) which leads to the
conclusion that it is justice to keep one’s own station (or to do
one’s own business), which is the station (or the business) of one’s
own class or caste.
The sole purpose of this second argument is to impress upon
the reader that ‘justice’, in the ordinary sense of the word, requires
us to keep our own station, since we should always keep what
belongs to us. That is to say, Plato wishes his readers to draw the
inference: ‘It is just to keep and to practise what is one’s own. My
place (or my business) is my own. Thus it is just for me to keep to
my place (or to practise my business).’ This is about as sound as
the argument: ‘It is just to keep and to practise what is one’s own.
This plan of stealing your money is my own. Thus it is just for me
to keep to my plan, and to put it into practice, i.e. to steal your
money.’ It is clear that the inference which Plato wishes us to draw
is nothing but a crude juggle with the meaning of the term ‘one’s
own’. (For the problem is whether justice demands that everything

which is in some sense ‘our own’, e.g. ‘our own’ class, should
therefore be treated, not only as our possession, but as our
inalienable possession. But in such a principle Plato himself does
not believe; for it would clearly make a transition to communism
impossible. And what about keeping our own children?) This crude
juggle is Plato’s way of establishing what Adam calls ‘a point of
contact between his own view of Justice and the popular ..
meaning of the word’. This is how the greatest philosopher of all
time tries to convince us that he has discovered the true nature of
justice.
The third and last argument which Plato offers is much more
serious. It is an appeal to the principle of holism or collectivism,
and is connected with the principle that it is the purpose of the
individual to maintain the stability of the state. It will therefore be
discussed, in this analysis, below, in sections v and vi.
But before proceeding to these points, I wish to draw attention
to the ‘preface’ which Plato places before his description of the
‘discovery’ which we are here examining. It must be considered in
the light of the observations we have made so far. Viewed in this
light, the ‘lengthy preface’—this is how Plato himself describes
it—appears as an ingenious attempt to prepare the reader for the
‘discovery of justice’ by making him believe that there is an
argument going on when in reality he is only faced with a display
of dramatic devices, designed to soothe his critical faculties.
Having discovered wisdom as the virtue proper to the
guardians and courage as that proper to the auxiliaries,’ Socrates’
announces his intention of making a final effort to discover justice.
‘Two things are left’24, he says, ‘which we shall have to discover in
the city: temperance, and finally that other thing which is the main
object of all our investigations, namely justice.’—‘Exactly’, says
Glaucon. Socrates now suggests that temperance shall be dropped.
But Glaucon protests and Socrates gives in, saying that’ it would
be wrong’ (or ‘crooked’) to refuse. This little dispute prepares the
reader for the re-introduction of justice, suggests to him that
Socrates possesses the means for its ‘discovery’, and reassures him
that Glaucon is carefully watching Plato’s intellectual honesty in
conducting the argument which he, the reader himself, need not
therefore watch at all25.
Socrates next proceeds to discuss temperance, which he
discovers to be the only virtue proper to the workers. (By the way,
the much debated question whether Plato’s ‘justice’ is

distinguishable from his ‘temperance’ can be easily answered.
Justice means to keep one’s place; temperance means to know
one’s place—that is to say, more precisely, to be satisfied with it.
What other virtue could be proper to the workers who fill their
bellies like the beasts?) When temperance has been discovered,
Socrates asks: ‘And what about the last principle? Obviously it will
be justice.’—‘Obviously’, replies Glaucon. ‘Now, my dear
Glaucon’, says Socrates, ‘we must, like hunters, surround her
cover and keep a close watch, and we must not allow her to escape,
and to get away; for surely, justice must be somewhere near this
spot. You had better look out and search the place. And if you are
the first to see her, then give me a shout!’ Glaucon, like the reader,
is of course unable to do anything of the sort, and implores
Socrates to take the lead. ‘Then offer your prayers with me’, says
Socrates, ‘and follow me.’ But even Socrates finds the ground
‘hard to traverse, since it is covered with underwood; it is dark, and
difficult to explore .. But’, he says, ‘we must go on with it’. And
instead of protesting ‘Go on with what? With our exploration, i.e.
with our argument? But we have not even started. There has not
been a glimmer of sense in what you have said so far’, Glaucon,
and the naive reader with him replies meekly: ‘Yes, we must go
on.’ Now Socrates reports that he has ‘got a glimpse’ (we have
not), and gets excited. ‘Hurray! Hurray!’ he cries, ‘Glaucon! There
seems to be a track! I think now that the quarry will not escape
us!’—‘That is good news’, replies Glaucon. ‘Upon my word’, says
Socrates, ‘we have made utter fools of ourselves. What we were
looking for at a distance, has been lying at our very feet all the
time! And we never saw it!’ With exclamations and repeated
assertions of this kind, Socrates continues for a good while,
interrupted by Glaucon, who gives expression to the reader’s
feelings and asks Socrates what he has found. But when Socrates
says only ‘We have been talking of it all the time, without realizing
that we were actually describing it’, Glaucon expresses the reader’s
impatience and says: ‘This preface gets a bit lengthy; remember
that I want to hear what it is all about.’ And only then does Plato
proceed to proffer the two ‘arguments’ which I have outlined.
Glaucon’s last remark may be taken as an indication that Plato
was conscious of what he was doing in this’ lengthy preface’. I
cannot interpret it as anything but an attempt—it proved to be
highly successful—to lull the reader’s critical faculties, and, by
means of a dramatic display of verbal fireworks, to divert his

attention from the intellectual poverty of this masterly piece of
dialogue. One is tempted to think that Plato knew its weakness,
and how to hide it.
V
The problem of individualism and collectivism is closely
related to that of equality and inequality. Before going on to
discuss it, a few terminological remarks seem to be necessary.
The term ‘individualism’ can be used (according to the Oxford
Dictionary) in two different ways: (a) in opposition to
collectivism, and (b) in opposition to altruism. There is no other
word to express the former meaning, but several synonyms for the
latter, for example ‘egoism’ or ‘selfishness’. This is why in what
follows I shall use the term ‘individualism’ exclusively in sense
(a), using terms like ‘egoism’ or ‘selfishness’ if sense (b) is
intended. A little table may be useful:
(a) Individualism is opposed to (a′) Collectivism.
(b) Egoism is opposed to
(b′) Altruism
Now these four terms describe certain attitudes, or demands, or
decisions, or proposals, for codes of normative laws. Though
necessarily vague, they can, I believe, be easily illustrated by
examples and so be used with a precision sufficient for our present
purpose. Let us begin with collectivism26, since this attitude is
already familiar to us from our discussion of Plato’s holism. His
demand that the individual should subserve the interests of the
whole, whether this be the universe, the city, the tribe, the race, or
any other collective body, was illustrated in the last chapter by a
few passages. To quote one of these again, but more fully27: ‘The
part exists for the sake of the whole, but the whole does not exist
for the sake of the part ... You are created for the sake of the whole
and not the whole for the sake of you.’ This quotation not only
illustrates holism and collectivism, but also conveys its strong
emotional appeal of which Plato was conscious (as can be seen
from the preamble to the passage.) The appeal is to various
feelings, e.g. the longing to belong to a group or a tribe; and one
factor in it is the moral appeal for altruism and against selfishness,
or egoism. Plato suggests that if you cannot sacrifice your interests
for the sake of the whole, then you are selfish.
Now a glance at our little table will show that this is not so.
Collectivism is not opposed to egoism, nor is it identical with
altruism or unselfishness. Collective or group egoism, for instance

class egoism, is a very common thing (Plato knew28 this very
well), and this shows clearly enough that collectivism as such is
not opposed to selfishness. On the other hand, an anti-collectivist,
i.e. an individualist, can, at the same time, be an altruist; he can be
ready to make sacrifices in order to help other individuals. One of
the best examples of this attitude is perhaps Dickens. It would be
difficult to say which is the stronger, his passionate hatred of
selfishness or his passionate interest in individuals with all their
human weaknesses; and this attitude is combined with a dislike,
not only of what we now call collective bodies or collectives29, but
even of a genuinely devoted altruism, if directed towards
anonymous groups rather than concrete individuals. (I remind the
reader of Mrs. Jellyby in Bleak House, ‘a lady devoted to public
duties’.) These illustrations, I think, explain sufficiently clearly the
meaning of our four terms; and they show that any of the terms in
our table can be combined with either of the two terms that stand
in the other line (which gives four possible combinations).
Now it is interesting that for Plato, and for most Platonists, an
altruistic individualism (as for instance that of Dickens) cannot
exist. According to Plato, the only alternative to collectivism is
egoism; he simply identifies all altruism with collectivism, and all
individualism with egoism. This is not a matter of terminology, of
mere words, for instead of four possibilities, Plato recognized only
two. This has created considerable confusion in speculation on
ethical matters, even down to our own day.
Plato’s identification of individualism with egoism furnishes
him with a powerful weapon for his defence of collectivism as well
as for his attack upon individualism. In defending collectivism, he
can appeal to our humanitarian feeling of unselfishness; in his
attack, he can brand all individualists as selfish, as incapable of
devotion to anything but themselves. This attack, although aimed
by Plato against individualism in our sense, i.e. against the rights
of human individuals, reaches of course only a very different
target, egoism. But this difference is constantly ignored by Plato
and by most Platonists.
Why did Plato try to attack individualism? I think he knew
very well what he was doing when he trained his guns upon this
position, for individualism, perhaps even more than
equalitarianism, was a stronghold in the defences of the new
humanitarian creed. The emancipation of the individual was indeed
the great spiritual revolution which had led to the breakdown of

tribalism and to the rise of democracy. Plato’s uncanny
sociological intuition shows itself in the way in which he
invariably discerned the enemy wherever he met him.
Individualism was part of the old intuitive idea of justice. That
justice is not, as Plato would have it, the health and harmony of the
state, but rather a certain way of treating individuals, is emphasized
by Aristotle, it will be remembered, when he says ‘justice is
something that pertains to persons’30. This individualistic element
had been emphasized by the generation of Pericles. Pericles
himself made it clear that the laws must guarantee equal justice ‘to
all alike in their private disputes’; but he went further. ‘We do not
feel called upon’, he said, ‘to nag at our neighbour if he chooses to
go his own way.’ (Compare this with Plato’s remark31 that the state
does not produce men ‘for the purpose of letting them loose, each
to go his own way ..’.) Pericles insists that this individualism must
be linked with altruism: ‘We are taught .. never to forget that we
must protect the injured’; and his speech culminates in a
description of the young Athenian who grows up ‘to a happy
versatility, and to self-reliance.’
This individualism, united with altruism, has become the basis
of our western civilization. It is the central doctrine of Christianity
(‘love your neighbour’, say the Scriptures, not ‘love your tribe’);
and it is the core of all ethical doctrines which have grown from
our civilization and stimulated it. It is also, for instance, Kant’s
central practical doctrine (‘always recognize that human
individuals are ends, and do not use them as mere means to your
ends’). There is no other thought which has been so powerful in
the moral development of man.
Plato was right when he saw in this doctrine the enemy of his
caste state; and he hated it more than any other of the ‘subversive’
doctrines of his time. In order to show this even more clearly, I
shall quote two passages from the Laws32 whose truly astonishing
hostility towards the individual is, I think, too little appreciated.
The first of them is famous as a reference to the Republic, whose
‘community of women and children and property’ it discusses.
Plato describes here the constitution of the Republic as ‘the highest
form of the state’. In this highest state, he tells us, ‘there is
common property of wives, of children, and of all chattels. And
everything possible has been done to eradicate from our life
everywhere and in every way all that is private and individual. So
far as it can be done, even those things which nature herself has

made private and individual have somehow become the common
property of all. Our very eyes and ears and hands seem to see, to
hear, and to act, as if they belonged not to individuals but to the
community. All men are moulded to be unanimous in the utmost
degree in bestowing praise and blame, and they even rejoice and
grieve about the same things, and at the same time. And all the
laws are perfected for unifying the city to the utmost.’ Plato goes
on to say that ‘no man can find a better criterion of the highest
excellence of a state than the principles just expounded’; and he
describes such a state as ‘divine’, and as the ‘model’ or ‘pattern’ or
‘original’ of the state, i.e. as its Form or Idea. This is Plato’s own
view of the Republic, expressed at a time when he had given up
hope of realizing his political ideal in all its glory.
The second passage, also from the Laws, is, if possible, even
more outspoken. It should be emphasized that the passage deals
primarily with military expeditions and with military discipline,
but Plato leaves no doubt that these same militarist principles
should be adhered to not only in war, but also ‘in peace, and from
the earliest childhood on’. Like other totalitarian militarists and
admirers of Sparta, Plato urges that the all-important requirements
of military discipline must be paramount, even in peace, and that
they must determine the whole life of all citizens; for not only the
full citizens (who are all soldiers) and the children, but also the
very beasts must spend their whole life in a state of permanent and
total mobilization33. ‘The greatest principle of all’, he writes, ‘is
that nobody, whether male or female, should ever be without a
leader. Nor should the mind of anybody be habituated to letting
him do anything at all on his own initiative, neither out of zeal, nor
even playfully. But in war and in the midst of peace—to his leader
he shall direct his eye, and follow him faithfully. And even in the
smallest matters he should stand under leadership. For example, he
should get up, or move, or wash, or take his meals34.. only if he has
been told to do so ... In a word, he should teach his soul, by long
habit, never to dream of acting independently, and to become
utterly incapable of it. In this way the life of all will be spent in
total community. There is no law, nor will there ever be one, which
is superior to this, or better and more effective in ensuring
salvation and victory in war. And in times of peace, and from the
earliest childhood on should it be fostered—this habit of ruling
others, and of being ruled by others. And every trace of anarchy

should be utterly eradicated from all the life of all the men, and
even of the wild beasts which are subject to men.’
These are strong words. Never was a man more in earnest in
his hostility towards the individual. And this hatred is deeply
rooted in the fundamental dualism of Plato’s philosophy; he hated
the individual and his freedom just as he hated the varying
particular experiences, the variety of the changing world of
sensible things. In the field of politics, the individual is to Plato the
Evil One himself.
This attitude, anti-humanitarian and anti-Christian as it is, has
been consistently idealized. It has been interpreted as humane, as
unselfish, as altruistic, and as Christian. E. B. England, for
instance, calls35 the first of these two passages from the Laws ‘a
vigorous denunciation of selfishness’. Similar words are used by
Barker, when discussing Plato’s theory of justice. He says that
Plato’s aim was ‘to replace selfishness and civil discord by
harmony’, and that ‘the old harmony of the interests of the State
and the individual .. is thus restored in the teachings of Plato; but
restored on a new and higher level, because it has been elevated
into a conscious sense of harmony’. Such statements and countless
similar ones can be easily explained if we remember Plato’s
identification of individualism with egoism; for all these Platonists
believe that anti-individualism is the same as selflessness. This
illustrates my contention that this identification had the effect of a
successful piece of anti-humanitarian propaganda, and that it has
confused speculation on ethical matters down to our own time. But
we must also realize that those who, deceived by this identification
and by high-sounding words, exalt Plato’s reputation as a teacher
of morals and announce to the world that his ethics is the nearest
approach to Christianity before Christ, are preparing the way for
totalitarianism and especially for a totalitarian, anti-Christian
interpretation of Christianity. And this is a dangerous thing, for
there have been times when Christianity was dominated by
totalitarian ideas. There was an Inquisition; and, in another form, it
may come again.
It may therefore be worth while to mention some further
reasons why guileless people have persuaded themselves of the
humaneness of Plato’s intentions. One is that when preparing the
ground for his collectivist doctrines, Plato usually begins by
quoting a maxim or proverb (which seems to be of Pythagorean
origin): ‘Friends have in common all things they possess.’36 This

is, undoubtedly, an unselfish, high-minded and excellent
sentiment. Who could suspect that an argument starting from such
a commendable assumption would arrive at a wholly antihumanitarian conclusion? Another and important point is that there
are many genuinely humanitarian sentiments expressed in Plato’s
dialogues, particularly in those written before the Republic when
he was still under the influence of Socrates. I mention especially
Socrates’ doctrine, in the Gorgias, that it is worse to do injustice
than to suffer it. Clearly, this doctrine is not only altruistic, but also
individualistic; for in a collectivist theory of justice like that of the
Republic, injustice is an act against the state, not against a
particular man, and though a man may commit an act of injustice,
only the collective can suffer from it. But in the Gorgias we find
nothing of the kind. The theory of justice is a perfectly normal one,
and the examples of injustice given by ‘Socrates’ (who has here
probably a good deal of the real Socrates in him) are such as
boxing a man’s ears, injuring, or killing him. Socrates’ teaching
that it is better to surfer such acts than to do them is indeed very
similar to Christian teaching, and his doctrine of justice fits in
excellently with the spirit of Pericles. (An attempt to interpret this
will be made in chapter 10.)
Now the Republic develops a new doctrine of justice which is
not merely incompatible with such an individualism, but utterly
hostile towards it. But a reader may easily believe that Plato is still
holding fast to the doctrine of the Gorgias. For in the Republic,
Plato frequently alludes to the doctrine that it is better to suffer
than to commit injustice, in spite of the fact that this is simply
nonsense from the point of view of the collectivist theory of justice
proffered in this work. Furthermore, we hear in the Republic the
opponents of ‘Socrates’ giving voice to the opposite theory, that it
is good and pleasant to inflict injustice, and bad to suffer it. Of
course, every humanitarian is repelled by such cynicism, and when
Plato formulates his aims through the mouth of Socrates: ‘I fear to
commit a sin if I permit such evil talk about Justice in my
presence, without doing my utmost to defend her’37, then the
trusting reader is convinced of Plato’s good intentions, and ready
to follow him wherever he goes.
The effect of this assurance of Plato’s is much enhanced by the
fact that it follows, and is contrasted with, the cynical and selfish
speeches38 of Thrasymachus, who is depicted as a political
desperado of the worst kind. At the same time, the reader is led to

identify individualism with the views of Thrasymachus, and to
think that Plato, in his fight against it, is fighting against all the
subversive and nihilistic tendencies of his time. But we should not
allow ourselves to be frightened by an individualist bogy such as
Thrasymachus (there is a great similarity between his portrait and
the modern collectivist bogy of ‘bolshevism’) into accepting
another more real and more dangerous because less obvious form
of barbarism. For Plato replaces Thrasymachus’ doctrine that the
individual’s might is right by the equally barbaric doctrine that
right is everything that furthers the stability and the might of the
state.
To sum up. Because of his radical collectivism, Plato is not
even interested in those problems which men usually call the
problems of justice, that is to say, in the impartial weighing of the
contesting claims of individuals. Nor is he interested in adjusting
the individual’s claims to those of the state. For the individual is
altogether inferior. ‘I legislate with a view to what is best for the
whole state’, says Plato, ‘.. for I justly place the interests of the
individual on an inferior level of value.’39 He is concerned solely
with the collective whole as such, and justice, to him, is nothing
but the health, unity, and stability of the collective body.
VI
So far, we have seen that humanitarian ethics demands an
equalitarian and individualistic interpretation of justice; but we
have not yet outlined the humanitarian view of the state as such.
On the other hand, we have seen that Plato’s theory of the state is
totalitarian; but we have not yet explained the application of this
theory to the ethics of the individual. Both these tasks will be
undertaken now, the second first; and I shall begin by analysing the
third of Plato’s arguments in his ‘discovery’ of justice, an
argument which has so far been sketched only very roughly. Here
is Plato’s third argument40:
‘Now see whether you agree with me’, says Socrates. ‘Do you
think it would do much harm to the city if a carpenter started
making shoes and a shoemaker carpentering?’—‘Not very
much.’—‘But should one who is by nature a worker, or a member
of the money-earning class .. manage to get into the warrior class;
or should a warrior get into the guardians’ class without being
worthy of it; then this kind of change and of underhand plotting
would mean the downfall of the city?’—‘Most definitely it

would.’—‘We have three classes in our city, and I take it that any
such plotting or changing from one class to another is a great crime
against the city, and may rightly be denounced as the utmost
wickedness?’—‘Assuredly.’—‘But you will certainly declare that
utmost wickedness towards one’s own city is injustice?’—
‘Certainly.’—‘Then this is injustice. And conversely, we shall say
that when each class in the city attends to its own business, the
money-earning class as well as the auxiliaries and the guardians,
then this will be justice.’
Now if we look at this argument, we find (a) the sociological
assumption that any relaxing of the rigid caste system must lead to
the downfall of the city; (b) the constant reiteration of the one
argument that what harms the city is injustice; and (c) the inference
that the opposite is justice. Now we may grant here the
sociological assumption (a) since it is Plato’s ideal to arrest social
change, and since he means by ‘harm’ anything that may lead to
change; and it is probably quite true that social change can be
arrested only by a rigid caste system. And we may further grant the
inference (c) that the opposite of injustice is justice. Of greater
interest, however, is (b); a glance at Plato’s argument will show
that his whole trend of thought is dominated by the question: does
this thing harm the city? Does it do much harm or little harm? He
constantly reiterates that what threatens to harm the city is morally
wicked and unjust.
We see here that Plato recognizes only one ultimate standard,
the interest of the state. Everything that furthers it is good and
virtuous and just; everything that threatens it is bad and wicked
and unjust. Actions that serve it are moral; actions that endanger it,
immoral. In other words, Plato’s moral code is strictly utilitarian; it
is a code of collectivist or political utilitarianism. The criterion of
morality is the interest of the state. Morality is nothing but political
hygiene.
This is the collectivist, the tribal, the totalitarian theory of
morality: ‘Good is what is in the interest of my group; or my tribe;
or my state.’ It is easy to see what this morality implied for
international relations: that the state itself can never be wrong in
any of its actions, as long as it is strong; that the state has the right,
not only to do violence to its citizens, should that lead to an
increase of strength, but also to attack other states, provided it does
so without weakening itself. (This inference, the explicit
recognition of the amorality of the state, and consequently the

defence of moral nihilism in international relations, was drawn by
Hegel.)
From the point of view of totalitarian ethics, from the point of
view of collective utility, Plato’s theory of justice is perfectly
correct. To keep one’s place is a virtue. It is that civil virtue which
corresponds exactly to the military virtue of discipline. And this
virtue plays exactly that role which ‘justice’ plays in Plato’s
system of virtues. For the cogs in the great clockwork of the state
can show ‘virtue’ in two ways. First, they must be fit for their task,
by virtue of their size, shape, strength, etc.; and secondly, they
must be fitted each into its right place and must retain that place.
The first type of virtues, fitness for a specific task, will lead to a
differentiation, in accordance with the specific task of the cog.
Certain cogs will be virtuous, i.e. fit, only if they are (‘by their
nature’) large; others if they are strong; and others if they are
smooth. But the virtue of keeping to one’s place will be common
to all of them; and it will at the same time be a virtue of the whole:
that of being properly fitted together—of being in harmony. To
this universal virtue Plato gives the name ‘justice’. This procedure
is perfectly consistent and it is fully justified from the point of
view of totalitarian morality. If the individual is nothing but a cog,
then ethics is nothing but the study of how to fit him into the
whole.
I wish to make it clear that I believe in the sincerity of Plato’s
totalitarianism. His demand for the unchallenged domination of
one class over the rest was uncompromising, but his ideal was not
the maximum exploitation of the working classes by the upper
class; it was the stability of the whole. The reason, however, which
he gives for the need to keep the exploitation within limits, is again
purely utilitarian. It is the interest of stabilizing the class rule.
Should the guardians try to get too much, he argues, then they will
in the end have nothing at all. ‘If they are not satisfied with a life
of stability and security,.. and are tempted, by their power, to
appropriate for themselves all the wealth of the city, then surely
they are bound to find out how wise Hesiod was when he said, “the
half is more than the whole”.’41 But we must realize that even this
tendency to restrict the exploitation of class privileges is a fairly
common ingredient of totalitarianism. Totalitarianism is not simply
amoral. It is the morality of the closed society—of the group, or of
the tribe; it is not individual selfishness, but it is collective
selfishness.

Considering that Plato’s third argument is straightforward and
consistent, the question may be asked why he needed the ‘lengthy
preface’ as well as the two preceding arguments? Why all this
uneasiness? (Platonists will of course reply that this uneasiness
exists only in my imagination. That may be so. But the irrational
character of the passages can hardly be explained away.) The
answer to this question is, I believe, that Plato’s collective
clockwork would hardly have appealed to his readers if it had been
presented to them in all its barrenness and meaninglessness. Plato
was uneasy because he knew and feared the strength and the moral
appeal of the forces he tried to break. He did not dare to challenge
them, but tried to win them over for his own purposes. Whether we
witness in Plato’s writings a cynical and conscious attempt to
employ the moral sentiments of the new humanitarianism for his
own purposes, or whether we witness rather a tragic attempt to
persuade his own better conscience of the evils of individualism,
we shall never know. My personal impression is that the latter is
the case, and that this inner conflict is the main secret of Plato’s
fascination. I think that Plato was moved to the depths of his soul
by the new ideas, and especially by the great individualist Socrates
and his martyrdom. And I think that he fought against this
influence upon himself as well as upon others with all the might of
his unequalled intelligence, though not always openly. This
explains also why from time to time, amid all his totalitarianism,
we find some humanitarian ideas. And it explains why it was
possible for philosophers to represent Plato as a humanitarian.
A strong argument in support of this interpretation is the way
in which Plato treated, or rather, maltreated, the humanitarian and
rational theory of the state, a theory which had been developed for
the first time in his generation.
In a clear presentation of this theory, the language of political
demands or of political proposals (cp. chapter 5, III) should be
used; that is to say, we should not try to answer the essentialist
question: What is the state, what is its true nature, its real meaning?
Nor should we try to answer the historicist question: How did the
state originate, and what is the origin of political obligation? We
should rather put our question in this way: What do we demand
from a state? What do we propose to consider as the legitimate aim
of state activity? And in order to find out what our fundamental
political demands are, we may ask: Why do we prefer living in a
well-ordered state to living without a state, i.e. in anarchy? This

way of asking our question is a rational one. It is a question which
a technologist must try to answer before he can proceed to the
construction or reconstruction of any political institution. For only
if he knows what he wants can he decide whether a certain
institution is or is not well adapted to its function.
Now if we ask our question in this way, the reply of the
humanitarian will be: What I demand from the state is protection;
not only for myself, but for others too. I demand protection for my
own freedom and for other people’s. I do not wish to live at the
mercy of anybody who has the larger fists or the bigger guns. In
other words, I wish to be protected against aggression from other
men. I want the difference between aggression and defence to be
recognized, and defence to be supported by the organized power of
the state. (The defence is one of a status quo, and the principle
proposed amounts to this—that the status quo should not be
changed by violent means, but only according to law, by
compromise or arbitration, except where there is no legal
procedure for its revision.) I am perfectly ready to see my own
freedom of action somewhat curtailed by the state, provided I can
obtain protection of that freedom which remains, since I know that
some limitations of my freedom are necessary; for instance, I must
give up my ‘freedom’ to attack, if I want the state to support
defence against any attack. But I demand that the fundamental
purpose of the state should not be lost sight of; I mean, the
protection of that freedom which does not harm other citizens.
Thus I demand that the state must limit the freedom of the citizens
as equally as possible, and not beyond what is necessary for
achieving an equal limitation of freedom.
Something like this will be the demand of the humanitarian, of
the equalitarian, of the individualist. It is a demand which permits
the social technologist to approach political problems rationally,
i.e. from the point of view of a fairly clear and definite aim.
Against the claim that an aim like this can be formulated
sufficiently clearly and definitely, many objections have been
raised. It has been said that once it is recognized that freedom must
be limited, the whole principle of freedom breaks down, and the
question what limitations are necessary and what are wanton
cannot be decided rationally, but only by authority. But this
objection is due to a muddle. It mixes up the fundamental question
of what we want from a state with certain important technological
difficulties in the way of the realization of our aims. It is certainly

difficult to determine exactly the degree of freedom that can be left
to the citizens without endangering that freedom whose protection
is the task of the state. But that something like an approximate
determination of that degree is possible is proved by experience,
i.e. by the existence of democratic states. In fact, this process of
approximate determination is one of the main tasks of legislation in
democracies. It is a difficult process, but its difficulties are
certainly not such as to force upon us a change in our fundamental
demands. These are, stated very briefly, that the state should be
considered as a society for the prevention of crime, i.e. of
aggression. And the whole, objection that it is hard to know where
freedom ends and crime begins is answered, in principle, by the
famous story of the hooligan who protested that, being a free
citizen, he could move his fist in any direction he liked; whereupon
the judge wisely replied: ‘The freedom of the movement of your
fists is limited by the position of your neighbour’s nose.’
The view of the state which I have sketched here may be called
‘protectionism’. The term ‘protectionism’ has often been used to
describe tendencies which are opposed to freedom. Thus the
economist means by protectionism the policy of protecting certain
industrial interests against competition; and the moralist means by
it the demand that officers of the state shall establish a moral
tutelage over the population. Although the political theory which I
call protectionism is not connected with any of these tendencies,
and although it is fundamentally a liberal theory, I think that the
name may be used to indicate that, though liberal, it has nothing to
do with the policy of strict non-intervention (often, but not quite
correctly, called ‘laissez faire’). Liberalism and state-interference
are not opposed to each other. On the contrary, any kind of
freedom is clearly impossible unless it is guaranteed by the state42.
A certain amount of state control in education, for instance, is
necessary, if the young are to be protected from a neglect which
would make them unable to defend their freedom, and the state
should see that all educational facilities are available to everybody.
But too much state control in educational matters is a fatal danger
to freedom, since it must lead to indoctrination. As already
indicated, the important and difficult question of the limitations of
freedom cannot be solved by a cut and dried formula. And the fact
that there will always be borderline cases must be welcomed, for
without the stimulus of political problems and political struggles of
this kind, the citizens’ readiness to fight for their freedom would

soon disappear, and with it, their freedom. (Viewed in this light,
the alleged clash between freedom and security, that is, a security
guaranteed by the state, turns out to be a chimera. For there is no
freedom if it is not secured by the state; and conversely, only a
state which is controlled by free citizens can offer them any
reasonable security at all.)
Stated in this way, the protectionist theory of the state is free
from any elements of historicism or essentialism. It does not say
that the state originated as an association of individuals with a
protectionist aim, or that any actual state in history was ever
consciously ruled in accordance with this aim. And it says nothing
about the essential nature of the state, or about a natural right to
freedom. Nor does it say anything about the way in which states
actually function. It formulates a political demand, or more
precisely, a proposal for the adoption of a certain policy. I suspect,
however, that many conventionalists who have described the state
as originating from an association for the protection of its
members, intended to express this very demand, though they did it
in a clumsy and misleading language—the language of historicism.
A similar misleading way of expressing this demand is to assert
that it is essentially the function of the state to protect its members;
or to assert that the state is to be denned as an association for
mutual protection. All these theories must be translated, as it were,
into the language of demands or proposals for political actions
before they can be seriously discussed. Otherwise, endless
discussions of a merely verbal character are unavoidable.
An example of such a translation may be given. A criticism of
what I call protectionism has been proffered by Aristotle43, and
repeated by Burke, and by many modern Platonists. This criticism
asserts that protectionism takes too mean a view of the tasks of the
state which is (using Burke’s words) ‘to be looked upon with other
reverence, because it is not a partnership in things subservient only
to the gross animal existence of a temporary and perishable
nature’. In other words, the state is said to be something higher or
nobler than an association with rational ends; it is an object of
worship. It has higher tasks than the protection of human beings
and their rights. It has moral tasks. ‘To take care of virtue is the
business of a state which truly deserves this name’, says Aristotle.
If we try to translate this criticism into the language of political
demands, then we find that these critics of protectionism want two
things. First, they wish to make the state an object of worship.

From our point of view, there is nothing to say against this wish. It
is a religious problem; and the state-worshippers must solve for
themselves how to reconcile their creed with their other religious
beliefs, for example, with the First Commandment. The second
demand is political. In practice, this demand would simply mean
that officers of the state should be concerned with the morality of
the citizens, and that they should use their power not so much for
the protection of the citizens’ freedom as for the control of their
moral life. In other words, it is the demand that the realm of
legality, i.e. of state-enforced norms, should be increased at the
expense of the realm of morality proper, i.e. of norms enforced not
by the state but by our own moral decisions—by our conscience.
Such a demand or proposal can be rationally discussed; and it can
be said against it that those who raise such demands apparently do
not see that this would be the end of the individual’s moral
responsibility, and that it would not improve but destroy morality.
It would replace personal responsibility by tribalistic taboos and by
the totalitarian irresponsibility of the individual. Against this whole
attitude, the individualist must maintain that the morality of states
(if there is any such thing) tends to be considerably lower than that
of the average citizen, so that it is much more desirable that the
morality of the state should be controlled by the citizens than the
opposite. What we need and what we want is to moralize politics,
and not to politicize morals.
It should be mentioned that, from the protectionist point of
view, the existing democratic states, though far from perfect,
represent a very considerable achievement in social engineering of
the right kind. Many forms of crime, of attack on the rights of
human individuals by other individuals, have been practically
suppressed or very considerably reduced, and courts of law
administer justice fairly successfully in difficult conflicts of
interest. There are many who think that the extension of these
methods44 to international crime and international conflict is only a
Utopian dream; but it is not so long since the institution of an
effective executive for upholding civil peace appeared Utopian to
those who suffered under the threats of criminals, in countries
where at present civil peace is quite successfully maintained. And I
think that the engineering problems of the control of international
crime are really not so difficult, once they are squarely and
rationally faced. If the matter is presented clearly, it will not be
hard to get people to agree that protective institutions are

necessary, both on a regional and on a world-wide scale. Let the
state-worshippers continue to worship the state, but demand that
the institutional technologists be allowed not only to improve its
internal machinery, but also to build up an organization for the
prevention of international crime.
VII
Returning now to the history of these movements, it seems that
the protectionist theory of the state was first proffered by the
Sophist Lycophron, a pupil of Gorgias. It has already been
mentioned that he was (like Alcidamas, also a pupil of Gorgias)
one of the first to attack the theory of natural privilege. That he
held the theory which I have called ‘protectionism’ is recorded by
Aristotle, who speaks about him in a manner which makes it very
likely that he originated it. From the same source we learn that he
formulated it with a clarity which has hardly been attained by any
of his successors.
Aristotle tells us that Lycophron considered the law of the state
as a ‘covenant by which men assure one another of justice’ (and
that it has not the power to make citizens good or just). He tells us
furthermore45 that Lycophron looked upon the state as an
instrument for the protection of its citizens against acts of injustice
(and for permitting them peaceful intercourse, especially
exchange), demanding that the state should be a ‘co-operative
association for the prevention of crime’. It is interesting that there
is no indication in Aristotle’s account that Lycophron expressed
his theory in a historicist form, i.e. as a theory concerning the
historical origin of the state in a social contract. On the contrary, it
emerges clearly from Aristotle’s context that Lycophron’s theory
was solely concerned with the end of the state; for Aristotle argues
that Lycophron has not seen that the essential end of the state is to
make its citizens virtuous. This indicates that Lycophron
interpreted this end rationally, from a technological point of view,
adopting the demands of equalitarianism, individualism, and
protectionism.
In this form, Lycophron’s theory is completely secure from the
objections to which the traditional historicist theory of the social
contract is exposed. It is often said, for instance by Barker46, that
the contract theory ‘has been met by modern thinkers point by
point’. That may be so; but a survey of Barker’s points will show
that they certainly do not meet the theory of Lycophron, in whom

Barker sees (and in this point I am inclined to agree with him) the
probable founder of the earliest form of a theory which has later
been called the contract theory. Barker’s points can be set down as
follows: (a) There was, historically, never a contract; (b) the state
was, historically, never instituted; (c) laws are not conventional,
but arise out of tradition, superior force, perhaps instinct, etc.; they
are customs before they become codes; (d) the strength of the laws
does not lie in the sanctions, in the protective power of the state
which enforces them, but in the individual’s readiness to obey
them, i.e. in the individual’s moral will.
It will be seen at once that objections (a), (b), and (c), which in
themselves are admittedly fairly correct (although there have been
some contracts) concern the theory only in its historicist form and
are irrelevant to Lycophron’s version. We therefore need not
consider them at all. Objection (d), however, deserves closer
consideration. What can be meant by it? The theory attacked
stresses the ‘will’, or better the decision of the individual, more
than any other theory; in fact, the word ‘contract’ suggests an
agreement by ‘free will’; it suggests, perhaps more than any other
theory, that the strength of the laws lies in the individual’s
readiness to accept and to obey them. How, then, can (d) be an
objection against the contract theory? The only explanation seems
to be that Barker does not think the contract to spring from the
‘moral will’ of the individual, but rather from a selfish will; and
this interpretation is the more likely as it is in keeping with Plato’s
criticism. But one need not be selfish in order to be a protectionist.
Protection need not mean self-protection; many people insure their
lives with the aim of protecting others and not themselves, and in
the same way they may demand state protection mainly for others,
and to a lesser degree (or not at all) for themselves. The
fundamental idea of protectionism is: protect the weak from being
bullied by the strong. This demand has been raised not only by the
weak, but often by the strong also. It is, to say the least of it,
misleading to suggest that it is a selfish or an immoral demand.
Lycophron’s protectionism is, I think, free of all these
objections. It is the most fitting expression of the humanitarian and
equalitarian movement of the Periclean age. And yet, we have been
robbed of it. It has been handed down to later generations only in a
distorted form; as the historicist theory of the origin of the state in
a social contract; or as an essentialist theory claiming that the true
nature of the state is that of a convention; and as a theory of

selfishness, based on the assumption of the fundamentally immoral
nature of man. All this is due to the overwhelming influence of
Plato’s authority.
VIII
There can be little doubt that Plato knew Lycophron’s theory
well, for he was (in all likelihood) Lycophron’s younger
contemporary. And, indeed, this theory can be easily identified
with one which is mentioned first in the Gorgias and later in the
Republic. (In neither place does Plato mention its author; a
procedure often adopted by him when his opponent was alive.) In
the Gorgias, the theory is expounded by Callicles, an ethical
nihilist like the Thrasymachus of the Republic. In the Republic, it
is expounded by Glaucon. In neither case does the speaker identify
himself with the theory he presents.
The two passages are in many respects parallel. Both present
the theory in a historicist form, i.e. as a theory of the origin of
‘justice’. Both present it as if its logical premises were necessarily
selfish and even nihilistic; i.e. as if the protectionist view of the
state was upheld only by those who would like to inflict injustice,
but are too weak to do so, and who therefore demand that the
strong should not do so either; a presentation which is certainly not
fair, since the only necessary premise of the theory is the demand
that crime, or injustice, should be suppressed.
So far, the two passages in the Gorgias and in the Republic run
parallel, a parallelism which has often been commented upon. But
there is a tremendous difference between them which has, so far as
I know, been overlooked by commentators. It is this. In the
Gorgias, the theory is presented by Callicles as one which he
opposes; and since he also opposes Socrates, the protectionist
theory is, by implication, not attacked but rather defended by Plato.
And, indeed, a closer view shows that Socrates upholds several of
its features against the nihilist Callicles. But in the Republic, the
same theory is presented by Glaucon as an elaboration and
development of the views of Thrasymachus, i.e. of the nihilist who
takes here the place of Callicles; in other words, the theory is
presented as nihilist, and Socrates as the hero who victoriously
destroys this devilish doctrine of selfishness.
Thus the passages in which most commentators find a
similarity between the tendencies of the Gorgias and the Republic
reveal, in fact, a complete change of front. In spite of Callicles’

hostile presentation, the tendency of the Gorgias is favourable to
protectionism; but the Republic is violently against it.
Here is an extract from Callicles’ speech in the Gorgias47: ‘The
laws are made by the great mass of the people which consists
mainly of the weak men. And they make the laws .. in order to
protect themselves and their interests. Thus they deter the stronger
men .. and all others who might get the better of them, from doing
so;.. and they mean by the word “injustice” the attempt of a man to
get the better of his neighbours; and being aware of their
inferiority, they are, I should say, only too glad if they can obtain
equality.’ If we look at this account and eliminate what is due to
Callicles’ open scorn and hostility, then we find all the elements of
Lycophron’s theory: equalitarianism, individualism, and protection
against injustice. Even the reference to the ‘strong’ and to the
‘weak’ who are aware of their inferiority fits the protectionist view
very well indeed, provided the element of caricature is allowed for.
It is not at all unlikely that Lycophron’s doctrine explicitly raised
the demand that the state should protect the weak, a demand which
is, of course, anything but ignoble. (The hope that this demand will
one day be fulfilled is expressed by the Christian teaching: ‘The
meek shall inherit the earth.’)
Callicles himself does not like protectionism; he is in favour of
the ‘natural’ rights of the stronger. It is very significant that
Socrates, in his argument against Callicles, comes to the rescue of
protectionism; for he connects it with his own central thesis—that
it is better to suffer injustice than to inflict it. He says, for
instance48: ‘Are not the many of the opinion, as you were lately
saying, that justice is equality? And also that it is more disgraceful
to inflict injustice than to suffer it?’ And later: ‘.. nature itself, and
not only convention, affirms that to inflict injustice is more
disgraceful than to suffer it, and that justice is equality.’ (In spite of
its individualistic and equalitarian and protectionist tendencies, the
Gorgias also exhibits some leanings which are strongly antidemocratic. The explanation may be that Plato when writing the
Gorgias had not yet developed his totalitarian theories; although
his sympathies were already anti-democratic, he was still under
Socrates’ influence. How anybody can think that the Gorgias and
the Republic can be both at the same time true accounts of
Socrates’ opinions, I fail to understand).
Let us now turn to the Republic, where Glaucon presents
protectionism as a logically more stringent but ethically unchanged

version of Thrasymachus’ nihilism. ‘My theme’, says Glaucon49,
‘is the origin of justice, and what sort of thing it really is.
According to some it is by nature an excellent thing to inflict
injustice upon others, and a bad thing to suffer it. But they hold
that the badness of suffering injustice much exceeds the
desirability of inflicting it. For a time, then, men will inflict
injustice on one another, and of course suffer it, and they will get a
good taste of both. But ultimately, those who are not strong enough
to repel it, or to enjoy inflicting it, decide that it is more profitable
for them to join in a contract, mutually assuring one another that
no one should inflict injustice, or suffer it. This is the way in which
laws were established ... And this is the nature and the origin of
justice, according to that theory.’
As far as its rational content goes, this is clearly the same
theory; and the way in which it is represented also resembles in
detail50 Callicles’ speech in the Gorgias. And yet, Plato has made a
complete change of front. The protectionist theory is now no
longer defended against the allegation that it is based on cynical
egoism; on the contrary. Our humanitarian sentiments, our moral
indignation, already aroused by Thrasymachus’ nihilism, are
utilized for turning us into enemies of protectionism. This theory,
whose humanitarian character has been indicated in the Gorgias, is
now made by Plato to appear as anti-humanitarian, and indeed, as
the outcome of the repulsive and most unconvincing doctrine that
injustice is a very good thing—for those who can get away with it.
And he does not hesitate to rub this point in. In an extensive
continuation of the passage quoted, Glaucon elaborates in much
detail the allegedly necessary assumptions or premises of
protectionism. Among these he mentions, for instance, the view
that the inflicting of injustice is ‘the best of all things’51; that
justice is established only because many men are too weak to
commit crimes; and that to the individual citizen, a life of crime
would be most profitable. And ‘Socrates’, i.e. Plato, vouches
explicitly52 for the authenticity of Glaucon’s interpretation of the
theory presented. By this method, Plato seems to have succeeded
in persuading most of his readers, and at any rate all Platonists, that
the protectionist theory here developed is identical with the
ruthless and cynical selfishness of Thrasymachus53; and, what is
more important, that all forms of individualism amount to the
same, namely, selfishness. But it was not only his admirers he
persuaded; he even succeeded in persuading his opponents, and

especially the adherents of the contract theory. From Carneades54
to Hobbes, they not only adopted his fatal historicist presentation,
but also Plato’s assurances that the basis of their theory was an
ethical nihilism.
Now it must be realized that the elaboration of its allegedly
selfish basis is the whole of Plato’s argument against
protectionism; and considering the space taken up by this
elaboration, we may safely assume that it was not his reticence
which made him proffer no better argument, but the fact that he
had none. Thus protectionism had to be dismissed by an appeal to
our moral sentiments—as an affront against the idea of justice, and
against our feelings of decency.
This is Plato’s method of dealing with a theory which was not
only a dangerous rival of his own doctrine, but also representative
of the new humanitarian and individualistic creed, i.e. the
archenemy of everything that was dear to Plato. The method is
clever; its astonishing success proves it. But I should not be fair if I
did not frankly admit that Plato’s method appears to me dishonest.
For the theory attacked does not need any assumption more
immoral than that injustice is evil, i.e. that it should be avoided,
and brought under control. And Plato knew quite well that the
theory was not based on selfishness, for in the Gorgias he had
presented it not as identical with the nihilistic theory from which it
is ‘derived’ in the Republic, but as opposed to it.
Summing up, we can say that Plato’s theory of justice, as
presented in the Republic and later works, is a conscious attempt to
get the better of the equalitarian, individualistic, and protectionist
tendencies of his time, and to re-establish the claims of tribalism
by developing a totalitarian moral theory. At the same time, he was
strongly impressed by the new humanitarian morality; but instead
of combating equalitarianism with arguments, he avoided even
discussing it. And he successfully enlisted the humanitarian
sentiments, whose strength he knew so well, in the cause of the
totalitarian class rule of a naturally superior master race.
These class prerogatives, he claimed, are necessary for
upholding the stability of the state. They constitute therefore the
essence of justice. Ultimately, this claim is based upon the
argument that justice is useful to the might, health, and stability of
the state; an argument which is only too similar to the modern
totalitarian definition: right is whatever is useful to the might of
my nation, or my class, or my party.

But this is not yet the whole story. By its emphasis on class
prerogative, Plato’s theory of justice puts the problem ‘Who should
rule?’ in the centre of political theory. His reply to this question
was that the wisest, and the best, should rule. Does not this
excellent reply modify the character of his theory?

Chapter 7: The Principle Of Leadership
The wise shall lead and rule, and the ignorant shall follow.
—PLATO.

Certain objections1 to our interpretation of Plato’s political
programme have forced us into an investigation of the part played,
within this programme, by such moral ideas as Justice, Goodness,
Beauty, Wisdom, Truth, and Happiness. The present and the two
following chapters are to continue this analysis, and the part played
by the idea of Wisdom in Plato’s political philosophy will occupy
us next.
We have seen that Plato’s idea of justice demands,
fundamentally, that the natural rulers should rule and the natural
slaves should slave. It is part of the historicist demand that the
state, in order to arrest all change, should be a copy of its Idea, or
of its true ‘nature’. This theory of justice indicates very clearly that
Plato saw the fundamental problem of politics in the question: Who
shall rule the state?
I
It is my conviction that by expressing the problem of politics in
the form ‘Who should rule?’ or ‘Whose will should be supreme?’,
etc., Plato created a lasting confusion in political philosophy. It is
indeed analogous to the confusion he created in the field of moral
philosophy by his identification, discussed in the last chapter, of
collectivism and altruism. It is clear that once the question ‘Who
should rule?’ is asked, it is hard to avoid some such reply as ‘the
best’ or ‘the wisest’ or ‘the born ruler’ or ‘he who masters the art
of ruling’ (or, perhaps, ‘The General Will’ or ‘The Master Race’ or
‘The Industrial Workers’ or ‘The People’). But such a reply,
convincing as it may sound—for who would advocate the rule of
‘the worst’ or ‘the greatest fool’ or ‘the born slave’?—is, as I shall
try to show, quite useless.
First of all, such a reply is liable to persuade us that some
fundamental problem of political theory has been solved. But if we

approach political theory from a different angle, then we find that
far from solving any fundamental problems, we have merely
skipped over them, by assuming that the question ‘Who should
rule?’ is fundamental. For even those who share this assumption of
Plato’s admit that political rulers are not always sufficiently ‘good’
or ‘wise’ (we need not worry about the precise meaning of these
terms), and that it is not at all easy to get a government on whose
goodness and wisdom one can implicitly rely. If that is granted,
then we must ask whether political thought should not face from
the beginning the possibility of bad government; whether we
should not prepare for the worst leaders, and hope for the best. But
this leads to a new approach to the problem of politics, for it forces
us to replace the question: Who should rule? by the new2 question:
How can we so organize political institutions that bad or
incompetent rulers can be prevented from doing too much
damage?
Those who believe that the older question is fundamental,
tacitly assume that political power is ‘essentially’ unchecked. They
assume that someone has the power—either an individual or a
collective body, such as a class. And they assume that he who has
the power can, very nearly, do what he wills, and especially that he
can strengthen his power, and thereby approximate it further to an
unlimited or unchecked power. They assume that political power
is, essentially, sovereign. If this assumption is made, then, indeed,
the question ‘Who is to be the sovereign?’ is the only important
question left.
I shall call this assumption the theory of (unchecked)
sovereignty, using this expression not for any particular one of the
various theories of sovereignty, proffered more especially by such
writers as Bodin, Rousseau, or Hegel, but for the more general
assumption that political power is practically unchecked, or for the
demand that it ought to be so; together with the implication that the
main question left is to get this power into the best hands. This
theory of sovereignty is tacitly assumed in Plato’s approach, and
has played its role ever since. It is also implicitly assumed, for
instance, by those modern writers who believe that the main
problem is: Who should dictate? The capitalists or the workers?
Without entering into a detailed criticism, I wish to point out
that there are serious objections against a rash and implicit
acceptance of this theory. Whatever its speculative merits may
appear to be, it is certainly a very unrealistic assumption. No

political power has ever been unchecked, and as long as men
remain human (as long as the ‘Brave New World’ has not
materialized), there can be no absolute and unrestrained political
power. So long as one man cannot accumulate enough physical
power in his hands to dominate all others, just so long must he
depend upon his helpers. Even the most powerful tyrant depends
upon his secret police, his henchmen and his hangmen. This
dependence means that his power, great as it may be, is not
unchecked, and that he has to make concessions, playing one group
off against another. It means that there are other political forces,
other powers besides his own, and that he can exert his rule only
by utilizing and pacifying them. This shows that even the extreme
cases of sovereignty are never cases of pure sovereignty. They are
never cases in which the will or the interest of one man (or, if there
were such a thing, the will or the interest of one group) can achieve
his aim directly, without giving up some of it in order to enlist
powers which he cannot conquer. And in an overwhelming number
of cases, the limitations of political power go much further than
this.
I have stressed these empirical points, not because I wish to use
them as an argument, but merely in order to avoid objections. My
claim is that every theory of sovereignty omits to face a more
fundamental question—the question, namely, whether we should
not strive towards institutional control of the rulers by balancing
their powers against other powers. This theory of checks and
balances can at least claim careful consideration. The only
objections to this claim, as far as I can see, are (a) that such a
control is practically impossible, or (b) that it is essentially
inconceivable since political power is essentially sovereign3. Both
of these dogmatic objections are, I believe, refuted by the facts;
and with them fall a number of other influential views (for
instance, the theory that the only alternative to the dictatorship of
one class is that of another class).
In order to raise the question of institutional control of the
rulers, we need not assume more than that governments are not
always good or wise. But since I have said something about
historical facts, I think I should confess that I feel inclined to go a
little beyond this assumption. I am inclined to think that rulers
have rarely been above the average, either morally or
intellectually, and often below it. And I think that it is reasonable
to adopt, in politics, the principle of preparing for the worst, as

well as we can, though we should, of course, at the same time try
to obtain the best. It appears to me madness to base all our political
efforts upon the faint hope that we shall be successful in obtaining
excellent, or even competent, rulers. Strongly as I feel in these
matters, I must insist, however, that my criticism of the theory of
sovereignty does not depend on these more personal opinions.
Apart from these personal opinions, and apart from the above
mentioned empirical arguments against the general theory of
sovereignty, there is also a kind of logical argument which can be
used to show the inconsistency of any of the particular forms of the
theory of sovereignty; more precisely, the logical argument can be
given different but analogous forms to combat the theory that the
wisest should rule, or else the theories that the best, or the law, or
the majority, etc., should rule. One particular form of this logical
argument is directed against a too naive version of liberalism, of
democracy, and of the principle that the majority should rule; and
it is somewhat similar to the well-known ‘paradox of freedom’
which has been used first, and with success, by Plato. In his
criticism of democracy, and in his story of the rise of the tyrant,
Plato raises implicitly the following question: What if it is the will
of the people that they should not rule, but a tyrant instead? The
free man, Plato suggests, may exercise his absolute freedom, first
by defying the laws and ultimately by defying freedom itself and
by clamouring for a tyrant4. This is not just a far-fetched
possibility; it has happened a number of times; and every time it
has happened, it has put in a hopeless intellectual position all those
democrats who adopt, as the ultimate basis of their political creed,
the principle of the majority rule or a similar form of the principle
of sovereignty. On the one hand, the principle they have adopted
demands from them that they should oppose any but the majority
rule, and therefore the new tyranny; on the other hand, the same
principle demands from them that they should accept any decision
reached by the majority, and thus the rule of the new tyrant. The
inconsistency of their theory must, of course, paralyse their
actions5. Those of us democrats who demand the institutional
control of the rulers by the ruled, and especially the right of
dismissing the government by a majority vote, must therefore base
these demands upon better grounds than a self-contradictory theory
of sovereignty. (That this is possible will be briefly shown in the
next section of this chapter.)

Plato, we have seen, came near to discovering the paradoxes of
freedom and of democracy. But what Plato and his followers
overlooked is that all the other forms of the theory of sovereignty
give rise to analogous inconsistencies. All theories of sovereignty
are paradoxical. For instance, we may have selected ‘the wisest’
or ‘the best’ as a ruler. But ‘the wisest’ in his wisdom may find
that not he but ‘the best’ should rule, and ‘the best’ in his goodness
may perhaps decide that ‘the majority’ should rule. It is important
to notice that even that form of the theory of sovereignty which
demands the ‘Kingship of the Law’ is open to the same objection.
This, in fact, has been seen very early, as Heraclitus’ remark6
shows: ‘The law can demand, too, that the will of One Man must
be obeyed.’
In summing up this brief criticism, one can, I believe, assert
that the theory of sovereignty is in a weak position, both
empirically and logically. The least that can be demanded is that it
must not be adopted without careful consideration of other
possibilities.
II
And indeed, it is not difficult to show that a theory of
democratic control can be developed which is free of the paradox
of sovereignty. The theory I have in mind is one which does not
proceed, as it were, from a doctrine of the intrinsic goodness or
righteousness of a majority rule, but rather from the baseness of
tyranny; or more precisely, it rests upon the decision, or upon the
adoption of the proposal, to avoid and to resist tyranny.
For we may distinguish two main types of government. The
first type consists of governments of which we can get rid without
bloodshed—for example, by way of general elections; that is to
say, the social institutions provide means by which the rulers may
be dismissed by the ruled, and the social traditions7 ensure that
these institutions will not easily be destroyed by those who are in
power. The second type consists of governments which the ruled
cannot get rid of except by way of a successful revolution—that is
to say, in most cases, not at all. I suggest the term ‘democracy’ as a
short-hand label for a government of the first type, and the term
‘tyranny’ or ‘dictatorship’ for the second. This, I believe,
corresponds closely to traditional usage. But I wish to make clear
that no part of my argument depends on the choice of these labels;
and should anybody reverse this usage (as is frequently done

nowadays), then I should simply say that I am in favour of what he
calls ‘tyranny’, and object to what he calls ‘democracy’; and I
should reject as irrelevant any attempt to discover what
‘democracy’ ‘really’ or ‘essentially’ means, for example, by
translating the term into ‘the rule of the people’. (For although ‘the
people’ may influence the actions of their rulers by the threat of
dismissal, they never rule themselves in any concrete, practical
sense.)
If we make use of the two labels as suggested, then we can now
describe, as the principle of a democratic policy, the proposal to
create, develop, and protect, political institutions for the avoidance
of tyranny. This principle does not imply that we can ever develop
institutions of this kind which are faultless or foolproof, or which
ensure that the policies adopted by a democratic government will
be right or good or wise—or even necessarily better or wiser than
the policies adopted by a benevolent tyrant. (Since no such
assertions are made, the paradox of democracy is avoided.) What
may be said, however, to be implied in the adoption of the
democratic principle is the conviction that the acceptance of even a
bad policy in a democracy (as long as we can work for a peaceful
change) is preferable to the submission to a tyranny, however wise
or benevolent. Seen in this light, the theory of democracy is not
based upon the principle that the majority should rule; rather, the
various equalitarian methods of democratic control, such as
general elections and representative government, are to be
considered as no more than well-tried and, in the presence of a
widespread traditional distrust of tyranny, reasonably effective
institutional safeguards against tyranny, always open to
improvement, and even providing methods for their own
improvement.
He who accepts the principle of democracy in this sense is
therefore not bound to look upon the result of a democratic vote as
an authoritative expression of what is right. Although he will
accept a decision of the majority, for the sake of making the
democratic institutions work, he will feel free to combat it by
democratic means, and to work for its revision. And should he live
to see the day when the majority vote destroys the democratic
institutions, then this sad experience will tell him only that there
does not exist a foolproof method of avoiding tyranny. But it need
not weaken his decision to fight tyranny, nor will it expose his
theory as inconsistent.

III
Returning to Plato, we find that by his emphasis upon the
problem ‘who should rule’, he implicitly assumed the general
theory of sovereignty. The question of an institutional control of
the rulers, and of an institutional balancing of their powers, is
thereby eliminated without ever having been raised. The interest is
shifted from institutions to questions of personnel, and the most
urgent problem now becomes that of selecting the natural leaders,
and that of training them for leadership.
In view of this fact some people think that in Plato’s theory, the
welfare of the state is ultimately an ethical and spiritual matter,
depending on persons and personal responsibility rather than on
the construction of impersonal institutions. I believe that this view
of Platonism is superficial. All long-term politics are institutional.
There is no escape from that, not even for Plato. The principle of
leadership does not replace institutional problems by problems of
personnel, it only creates new institutional problems. As we shall
see, it even burdens the institutions with a task which goes beyond
what can be reasonably demanded from a mere institution, namely,
with the task of selecting the future leaders. It would be therefore a
mistake to think that the opposition between the theory of balances
and the theory of sovereignty corresponds to that between
institutionalism and personalism. Plato’s principle of leadership is
far removed from a pure personalism since it involves the working
of institutions; and indeed it may be said that a pure personalism is
impossible. But it must be said that a pure institutionalism is
impossible also. Not only does the construction of institutions
involve important personal decisions, but the functioning of even
the best institutions (such as democratic checks and balances) will
always depend, to a considerable degree, on the persons involved.
Institutions are like fortresses. They must be well designed and
manned.
This distinction between the personal and the institutional
element in a social situation is a point which is often missed by the
critics of democracy. Most of them are dissatisfied with democratic
institutions because they find that these do not necessarily prevent
a state or a policy from falling short of some moral standards or of
some political demands which may be urgent as well as admirable.
But these critics misdirect their attacks; they do not understand
what democratic institutions may be expected to do, and what the
alternative to democratic institutions would be. Democracy (using

this label in the sense suggested above) provides the institutional
framework for the reform of political institutions. It makes possible
the reform of institutions without using violence, and thereby the
use of reason in the designing of new institutions and the adjusting
of old ones. It cannot provide reason. The question of the
intellectual and moral standard of its citizens is to a large degree a
personal problem. (The idea that this problem can be tackled, in
turn, by an institutional eugenic and educational control is, I
believe, mistaken; some reasons for my belief will be given
below.) It is quite wrong to blame democracy for the political
shortcomings of a democratic state. We should rather blame
ourselves, that is to say, the citizens of the democratic state. In a
non-democratic state, the only way to achieve reasonable reforms
is by the violent overthrow of the government, and the introduction
of a democratic framework. Those who criticize democracy on any
‘moral’ grounds fail to distinguish between personal and
institutional problems. It rests with us to improve matters. The
democratic institutions cannot improve themselves. The problem
of improving them is always a problem for persons rather than for
institutions. But if we want improvements, we must make clear
which institutions we want to improve.
There is another distinction within the field of political
problems corresponding to that between persons and institutions. It
is the one between the problems of the day and the problems of the
future. While the problems of the day are largely personal, the
building of the future must necessarily be institutional. If the
political problem is approached by asking ‘Who should rule’, and
if Plato’s principle of leadership is adopted—that is to say, the
principle that the best should rule—then the problem of the future
must take the form of designing institutions for the selection of
future leaders.
This is one of the most important problems in Plato’s theory of
education. In approaching it I do not hesitate to say that Plato
utterly corrupted and confused the theory and practice of education
by linking it up with his theory of leadership. The damage done is,
if possible, even greater than that inflicted upon ethics by the
identification of collectivism with altruism, and upon political
theory by the introduction of the principle of sovereignty. Plato’s
assumption that it should be the task of education (or more
precisely, of the educational institutions) to select the future
leaders, and to train them for leadership, is still largely taken for

granted. By burdening these institutions with a task which must go
beyond the scope of any institution, Plato is partly responsible for
their deplorable state. But before entering into a general discussion
of his view of the task of education, I wish to develop, in more
detail, his theory of leadership, the leadership of the wise.
IV
I think it most likely that this theory of Plato’s owes a number
of its elements to the influence of Socrates. One of the fundamental
tenets of Socrates was, I believe, his moral intellectualism. By this
I understand (a) his identification of goodness and wisdom, his
theory that nobody acts against his better knowledge, and that lack
of knowledge is responsible for all moral mistakes; (b) his theory
that moral excellence can be taught, and that it does not require
any particular moral faculties, apart from the universal human
intelligence.
Socrates was a moralist and an enthusiast. He was the type of
man who would criticize any form of government for its
shortcomings (and indeed, such criticism would be necessary and
useful for any government, although it is possible only under a
democracy) but he recognized the importance of being loyal to the
laws of the state. As it happened, he spent his life largely under a
democratic form of government, and as a good democrat he found
it his duty to expose the incompetence and windbaggery of some
of the democratic leaders of his time. At the same time, he opposed
any form of tyranny; and if we consider his courageous behaviour
under the Thirty Tyrants then we have no reason to assume that his
criticism of the democratic leaders was inspired by anything like
anti-democratic leanings8. It is not unlikely that he demanded (like
Plato) that the best should rule, which would have meant, in his
view, the wisest, or those who knew something about justice. But
we must remember that by ‘justice’ he meant equalitarian justice
(as indicated by the passages from the Gorgias quoted in the last
chapter), and that he was not only an equalitarian but also an
individualist—perhaps the greatest apostle of an individualistic
ethics of all time. And we should realize that, if he demanded that
the wisest men should rule, he clearly stressed that he did not mean
the learned men; in fact, he was sceptical of all professional
learnedness, whether it was that of the philosophers of the past or
of the learned men of his own generation, the Sophists. The
wisdom he meant was of a different kind. It was simply the

realization: how little do I know! Those who did not know this, he
taught, knew nothing at all. (This is the true scientific spirit. Some
people still think, as Plato did when he had established himself as a
learned Pythagorean sage9, that Socrates’ agnostic attitude must be
explained by the lack of success of the science of his day. But this
only shows that they do not understand this spirit, and that they are
still possessed by the pre-Socratic magical attitude towards
science, and towards the scientist, whom they consider as a
somewhat glorified shaman, as wise, learned, initiated. They judge
him by the amount of knowledge in his possession, instead of
taking, with Socrates, his awareness of what he does not know as a
measure of his scientific level as well as of his intellectual
honesty.)
It is important to see that this Socratic intellectualism is
decidedly equalitarian. Socrates believed that everyone can be
taught; in the Meno, we see him teaching a young slave a version10
of the now so-called theorem of Pythagoras, in an attempt to prove
that any uneducated slave has the capacity to grasp even abstract
matters. And his intellectualism is also anti-authoritarian. A
technique, for instance rhetoric, may perhaps be dogmatically
taught by an expert, according to Socrates; but real knowledge,
wisdom, and also virtue, can be taught only by a method which he
describes as a form of midwifery. Those eager to learn may be
helped to free themselves from their prejudice; thus they may learn
self-criticism, and that truth is not easily attained. But they may
also learn to make up their minds, and to rely, critically, on their
decisions, and on their insight. In view of such teaching, it is clear
how much the Socratic demand (if he ever raised this demand) that
the best, i.e. the intellectually honest, should rule, differs from the
authoritarian demand that the most learned, or from the aristocratic
demand that the best, i.e. the most noble, should rule. (Socrates’
belief that even courage is wisdom can, I think, be interpreted as a
direct criticism of the aristocratic doctrine of the nobly born hero.)
But this moral intellectualism of Socrates is a two-edged
sword. It has its equalitarian and democratic aspect, which was
later developed by Antisthenes. But it has also an aspect which
may give rise to strongly anti-democratic tendencies. Its stress
upon the need for enlightenment, for education, might easily be
misinterpreted as a demand for authoritarianism. This is connected
with a question which seems to have puzzled Socrates a great deal:
that those who are not sufficiently educated, and thus not wise

enough to know their deficiencies, are just those who are in the
greatest need of education. Readiness to learn in itself proves the
possession of wisdom, in fact all the wisdom claimed by Socrates
for himself; for he who is ready to learn knows how little he
knows. The uneducated seems thus to be in need of an authority to
wake him up, since he cannot be expected to be self-critical. But
this one element of authoritarianism was wonderfully balanced in
Socrates’ teaching by the emphasis that the authority must not
claim more than that. The true teacher can prove himself only by
exhibiting that self-criticism which the uneducated lacks.
‘Whatever authority I may have rests solely upon my knowing how
little I know’: this is the way in which Socrates might have
justified his mission to stir up the people from their dogmatic
slumber. This educational mission he believed to be also a political
mission. He felt that the way to improve the political life of the city
was to educate the citizens to self-criticism. In this sense he
claimed to be ‘the only politician of his day’11, in opposition to
those others who flatter the people instead of furthering their true
interests.
This Socratic identification of his educational and political
activity could easily be distorted into the Platonic and Aristotelian
demand that the state should look after the moral life of its citizens.
And it can easily be used for a dangerously convincing proof that
all democratic control is vicious. For how can those whose task it
is to educate be judged by the uneducated? How can the better be
controlled by the less good? But this argument is, of course,
entirely un-Socratic. It assumes an authority of the wise and
learned man, and goes far beyond Socrates’ modest idea of the
teacher’s authority as founded solely on his consciousness of his
own limitations. State-authority in these matters is liable to
achieve, in fact, the exact opposite of Socrates’ aim. It is liable to
produce dogmatic self-satisfaction and massive intellectual
complacency, instead of critical dissatisfaction and eagerness for
improvement. I do not think that it is unnecessary to stress this
danger which is seldom clearly realized. Even an author like
Grossman, who, I believe, understood the true Socratic spirit,
agrees12 with Plato in what he calls Plato’s third criticism of
Athens: ‘Education, which should be the major responsibility of
the State, had been left to individual caprice .. Here again was a
task which should be entrusted only to the man of proven probity.
The future of any State depends on the younger generation, and it

is therefore madness to allow the minds of children to be moulded
by individual taste and force of circumstances. Equally disastrous
had been the State’s laissez faire policy with regard to teachers and
schoolmasters and sophist-lecturers.’13 But the Athenian state’s
laissez faire policy, criticized by Grossman and Plato, had the
invaluable result of enabling certain sophist-lecturers to teach, and
especially the greatest of them all, Socrates. And when this policy
was later dropped, the result was Socrates’ death. This should be a
warning that state control in such matters is dangerous, and that the
cry for the ‘man of proven probity’ may easily lead to the
suppression of the best. (Bertrand Russell’s recent suppression is a
case in point.) But as far as basic principles are concerned, we have
here an instance of the deeply rooted prejudice that the only
alternative to laissez faire is full state responsibility. I certainly
believe that it is the responsibility of the state to see that its citizens
are given an education enabling them to participate in the life of
the community, and to make use of any opportunity to develop
their special interests and gifts; and the state should certainly also
see (as Grossman rightly stresses) that the lack of ‘the individual’s
capacity to pay’ should not debar him from higher studies. This, I
believe, belongs to the state’s protective functions. To say,
however, that ‘the future of the state depends on the younger
generation, and that it is therefore madness to allow the minds of
children to be moulded by individual taste’, appears to me to open
wide the door to totalitarianism. State interest must not be lightly
invoked to defend measures which may endanger the most
precious of all forms of freedom, namely, intellectual freedom.
And although I do not advocate ‘laissez faire with regard to
teachers and schoolmasters’, I believe that this policy is infinitely
superior to an authoritative policy that gives officers of the state
full powers to mould minds, and to control the teaching of science,
thereby backing the dubious authority of the expert by that of the
state, ruining science by the customary practice of teaching it as an
authoritative doctrine, and destroying the scientific spirit of
inquiry—the spirit of the search for truth, as opposed to the belief
in its possession.
I have tried to show that Socrates’ intellectualism was
fundamentally equalitarian and individualistic, and that the element
of authoritarianism which it involved was reduced to a minimum
by Socrates’ intellectual modesty and his scientific attitude. The
intellectualism of Plato is very different from this. The Platonic

‘Socrates’ of the Republic14 is the embodiment of an unmitigated
authoritarianism. (Even his self-deprecating remarks are not based
upon awareness of his limitations, but are rather an ironical way of
asserting his superiority.) His educational aim is not the awakening
of self-criticism and of critical thought in general. It is, rather,
indoctrination—the moulding of minds and of souls which (to
repeat a quotation from the Laws15) are ‘to become, by long habit,
utterly incapable of doing anything at all independently’. And
Socrates’ great equalitarian and liberating idea that it is possible to
reason with a slave, and that there is an intellectual link between
man and man, a medium of universal understanding, namely,
‘reason’, this idea is replaced by a demand for an educational
monopoly of the ruling class, coupled with the strictest censorship,
even of oral debates.
Socrates had stressed that he was not wise; that he was not in
the possession of truth, but that he was a searcher, an inquirer, a
lover of truth. This, he explained, is expressed by the word
‘philosopher’, i.e. the lover of wisdom, and the seeker for it, as
opposed to ‘Sophist’, i.e. the professionally wise man. If ever he
claimed that statesmen should be philosophers, he could only have
meant that, burdened with an excessive responsibility, they should
be searchers for truth, and conscious of their limitations.
How did Plato convert this doctrine? At first sight, it might
appear that he did not alter it at all, when demanding that the
sovereignty of the state should be invested in the philosophers;
especially since, like Socrates, he defined philosophers as lovers of
truth. But the change made by Plato is indeed tremendous. His
lover is no longer the modest seeker, he is the proud possessor of
truth. A trained dialectician, he is capable of intellectual intuition,
i.e. of seeing, and of communicating with, the eternal, the heavenly
Forms or Ideas. Placed high above all ordinary men, he is ‘godlike, if not .. divine’16, both in his wisdom and in his power. Plato’?
ideal philosopher approaches both to omniscience and to
omnipotence. He is the Philosopher-King. It is hard, I think, to
conceive a greater contrast than that between the Socratic and the
Platonic ideal of a philosopher. It is the contrast between two
worlds—the world of a modest, rational individualist and that of a
totalitarian demi-god.
Plato’s demand that the wise man should rule—the possessor
of truth, the ‘fully qualified philosopher’17—raises, of course, the
problem of selecting and educating the rulers. In a purely

personalist (as opposed to an institutional) theory, this problem
might be solved simply by declaring that the wise ruler will in his
wisdom be wise enough to choose the best man for his successor.
This is not, however, a very satisfactory approach to the problem.
Too much would depend on uncontrolled circumstances; an
accident may destroy the future stability of the state. But the
attempt to control circumstances, to foresee what might happen
and to provide for it, must lead here, as everywhere, to the
abandonment of a purely personalist solution, and to its
replacement by an institutional one. As already stated, the attempt
to plan for the future must always lead to institutionalism.
V
The institution which according to Plato has to look after the
future leaders can be described as the educational department of
the state. It is, from a purely political point of view, by far the most
important institution within Plato’s society. It holds the keys to
power. For this reason alone it should be clear that at least the
higher grades of education are to be directly controlled by the
rulers. But there are some additional reasons for this. The most
important is that only ‘the expert and .. the man of proven probity’,
as Grossman puts it, which in Plato’s view means only the very
wisest adepts, that is to say, the rulers themselves, can be entrusted
with the final initiation of the future sages into the higher mysteries
of wisdom. This holds, above all, for dialectics, i.e. the art of
intellectual intuition, of visualizing the divine originals, the Forms
or Ideas, of unveiling the Great Mystery behind the common man’s
everyday world of appearances.
What are Plato’s institutional demands regarding this highest
form of education? They are remarkable. He demands that only
those who are past their prime of life should be admitted. ‘When
their bodily strength begins to fail, and when they are past the age
of public and military duties, then, and only then, should they be
permitted to enter at will the sacred field ...’18 namely, the field of
the highest dialectical studies. Plato’s reason for this amazing rule
is clear enough. He is afraid of the power of thought. ‘All great
things are dangerous’19 is the remark by which he introduces the
confession that he is afraid of the effect which philosophic thought
may have upon brains which are not yet on the verge of old age.
(All this he puts into the mouth of Socrates, who died in defence of
his right of free discussion with the young.) But this is exactly

what we should expect if we remember that Plato’s fundamental
aim was to arrest political change. In their youth, the members of
the upper class shall fight. When they are too old to think
independently, they shall become dogmatic students to be imbued
with wisdom and authority in order to become sages themselves
and to hand on their wisdom, the doctrine of collectivism and
authoritarianism, to future generations.
It is interesting that in a later and more elaborate passage which
attempts to paint the rulers in the brightest colours, Plato modifies
his suggestion. Now20 he allows the future sages to begin their
preparatory dialectical studies at the age of thirty, stressing, of
course, ‘the need for great caution’ and the dangers of
‘insubordination .. which corrupts so many dialecticians’; and he
demands that ‘those to whom the use of arguments may be
permitted must possess disciplined and well-balanced natures’.
This alteration certainly helps to brighten the picture. But the
fundamental tendency is the same. For, in the continuation of this
passage, we hear that the future leaders must not be initiated into
the higher philosophical studies—into the dialectic vision of the
essence of the Good—before they reach, having passed through
many tests and temptations, the age of fifty.
This is the teaching of the Republic. It seems that the dialogue
Parmenides21 contains a similar message, for here Socrates is
depicted as a brilliant young man who, having dabbled
successfully in pure philosophy, gets into serious trouble when
asked to give an account of the more subtle problems of the theory
of ideas. He is dismissed by the old Parmenides with the
admonition that he should train himself more thoroughly in the art
of abstract thought before venturing again into the higher field of
philosophical studies. It looks as if we had here (among other
things) Plato’s answer—‘Even a Socrates was once too young for
dialectics’—to his pupils who pestered him for an initiation which
he considered premature.
Why is it that Plato does not wish his leaders to have
originality or initiative? The answer, I think, is clear. He hates
change and does not want to see that re-adjustments may become
necessary. But this explanation of Plato’s attitude does not go deep
enough. In fact, we are faced here with a fundamental difficulty of
the leader principle. The very idea of selecting or educating future
leaders is self-contradictory. You may solve the problem, perhaps,
to some degree in the field of bodily excellence. Physical initiative

and bodily courage are perhaps not so hard to ascertain. But the
secret of intellectual excellence is the spirit of criticism; it is
intellectual independence. And this leads to difficulties which must
prove insurmountable for any kind of authoritarianism. The
authoritarian will in general select those who obey, who believe,
who respond to his influence. But in doing so, he is bound to select
mediocrities. For he excludes those who revolt, who doubt, who
dare to resist his influence. Never can an authority admit that the
intellectually courageous, i.e. those who dare to defy his authority,
may be the most valuable type. Of course, the authorities will
always remain convinced of their ability to detect initiative. But
what they mean by this is only a quick grasp of their intentions,
and they will remain for ever incapable of seeing the difference.
(Here we may perhaps penetrate the secret of the particular
difficulty of selecting capable military leaders. The demands of
military discipline enhance the difficulties discussed, and the
methods of military advancement are such that those who do dare
to think for themselves are usually eliminated. Nothing is less true,
as far as intellectual initiative is concerned, than the idea that those
who are good in obeying will also be good in commanding22. Very
similar difficulties arise in political parties: the ‘Man Friday’ of the
party leader is seldom a capable successor.)
We are led here, I believe, to a result of some importance, and
to one which can be generalized. Institutions for the selection of
the outstanding can hardly be devised. Institutional selection may
work quite well for such purposes as Plato had in mind, namely for
arresting change. But it will never work well if we demand more
than that, for it will always tend to eliminate initiative and
originality, and, more generally, qualities which are unusual and
unexpected. This is not a criticism of political institutionalism. It
only re-affirms what has been said before, that we should always
prepare for the worst leaders, although we should try, of course, to
get the best. But it is a criticism of the tendency to burden
institutions, especially educational institutions, with the impossible
task of selecting the best. This should never be made their task.
This tendency transforms our educational system into a racecourse, and turns a course of studies into a hurdle-race. Instead of
encouraging the student to devote himself to his studies for the
sake of studying, instead of encouraging in him a real love for his
subject and for inquiry23, he is encouraged to study for the sake of
his personal career; he is led to acquire only such knowledge as is

serviceable in getting him over the hurdles which he must clear for
the sake of his advancement. In other words, even in the field of
science, our methods of selection are based upon an appeal to
personal ambition of a somewhat crude form. (It is a natural
reaction to this appeal if the eager student is looked upon with
suspicion by his colleagues.) The impossible demand for an
institutional selection of intellectual leaders endangers the very life
not only of science, but of intelligence.
It has been said, only too truly, that Plato was the inventor of
both our secondary schools and our universities. I do not know a
better argument for an optimistic view of mankind, no better proof
of their indestructible love for truth and decency, of their
originality and stubbornness and health, than the fact that this
devastating system of education has not utterly ruined them. In
spite of the treachery of so many of their leaders, there are quite a
number, old as well as young, who are decent, and intelligent, and
devoted to their task. ‘I sometimes wonder how it was that the
mischief done was not more clearly perceptible,’ says Samuel
Butler24, ‘and that the young men and women grew up as sensible
and goodly as they did, in spite of the attempts almost deliberately
made to warp and stunt their growth. Some doubtless received
damage, from which they suffered to their life’s end; but many
seemed little or none the worse, and some almost the better. The
reason would seem to be that the natural instinct of the lads in most
cases so absolutely rebelled against their training, that do what the
teachers might they could never get them to pay serious heed to it.’
It may be mentioned here that, in practice, Plato did not prove
too successful as a selector of political leaders. I have in mind not
so much the disappointing outcome of his experiment with
Dionysius the Younger, tyrant of Syracuse, but rather the
participation of Plato’s Academy in Dio’s successful expedition
against Dionysius. Plato’s famous friend Dio was supported in this
adventure by a number of members of Plato’s Academy. One of
them was Callippus, who became Dio’s most trusted comrade.
After Dio had made himself tyrant of Syracuse he ordered
Heraclides, his ally (and perhaps his rival), to be murdered. Shortly
afterwards he was himself murdered by Callippus who usurped the
tyranny, which he lost after thirteen months. (He was, in turn,
murdered by the Pythagorean philosopher Leptines.) But this event
was not the only one of its kind in Plato’s career as a teacher.
Clearchus, one of Plato’s (and of Isocrates’) disciples, made

himself tyrant of Heraclea after having posed as a democratic
leader. He was murdered by his relation, Chion, another member
of Plato’s Academy. (We cannot know how Chion, whom some
represent as an idealist, would have developed, since he was soon
killed.) These and a few similar experiences of Plato’s25—who
could boast a total of at least nine tyrants among his one-time
pupils and associates—throw light on the peculiar difficulties
connected with the selection of men who are to be invested with
absolute power. It is hard to find a man whose character will not be
corrupted by it. As Lord Acton says—all power corrupts, and
absolute power corrupts absolutely.
To sum up. Plato’s political programme was much more
institutional than personalist; he hoped to arrest political change by
the institutional control of succession in leadership. The control
was to be educational, based upon an authoritarian view of
learning—upon the authority of the learned expert, and ‘the man of
proven probity’. This is what Plato made of Socrates’ demand that
a responsible politician should be a lover of truth and of wisdom
rather than an expert, and that he was wise only26 if he knew his
limitations.

Chapter 8: The Philosopher King
And the state will erect monuments ... to commemorate them.
And sacrifices will be offered to them as demigods,... as men who
are blessed by grace, and godlike.
—PLATO.

The contrast between the Platonic and the Socratic creed is
even greater than I have shown so far. Plato, I have said, followed
Socrates in his definition of the philosopher. ‘Whom do you call
true philosophers?—Those who love truth’, we read in the
Republic1. But he himself is not quite truthful when he makes this
statement. He does not really believe in it, for he bluntly declares
in other places that it is one of the royal privileges of the sovereign
to make full use of lies and deceit: ‘It is the business of the rulers
of the city, if it is anybody’s, to tell lies, deceiving both its enemies
and its own citizens for the benefit of the city; and no one else
must touch this privilege.’2
‘For the benefit of the city’, says Plato. Again we find that the
appeal to the principle of collective utility is the ultimate ethical
consideration. Totalitarian morality overrules everything, even the

definition, the Idea, of the philosopher. It need hardly be
mentioned that, by the same principle of political expediency, the
ruled are to be forced to tell the truth. ‘If the ruler catches anyone
else in a lie .. then he will punish him for introducing a practice
which injures and endangers the city ...’3 Only in this slightly
unexpected sense are the Platonic rulers—the philosopher kings—
lovers of truth.
I
Plato illustrates this application of his principle of collective
utility to the problem of truthfulness by the example of the
physician. The example is well chosen, since Plato likes to
visualize his political mission as one of the healer or saviour of the
sick body of society. Apart from this, the role which he assigns to
medicine throws light upon the totalitarian character of Plato’s city
where state interest dominates the life of the citizen from the
mating of his parents to his grave. Plato interprets medicine as a
form of politics, or as he puts it himself, he ‘regards Aesculapius,
the god of medicine, as a politician’4. Medical art, he explains,
must not consider the prolongation of life as its aim, but only the
interest of the state. ‘In all properly ruled communities, each man
has his particular work assigned to him in the state. This he must
do, and no one has time to spend his life in falling ill and getting
cured.’ Accordingly, the physician has ‘no right to attend to a man
who cannot carry out his ordinary duties; for such a man is useless
to himself and to the state’. To this is added the consideration that
such a man might have ‘children who would probably be equally
sick’, and who also would become a burden to the state. (In his old
age, Plato mentions medicine, in spite of his increased hatred of
individualism, in a more personal vein. He complains of the doctor
who treats even free citizens as if they were slaves, ‘issuing his
orders like a tyrant whose will is law, and then rushing off to the
next slave-patient’5, and he pleads for more gentleness and
patience in medical treatment, at least for those who are not
slaves.) Concerning the use of lies and deceit, Plato urges that
these are ‘useful only as a medicine’6; but the ruler of the state,
Plato insists, must not behave like some of those ‘ordinary doctors’
who have not the courage to administer strong medicines. The
philosopher king, a lover of truth as a philosopher, must, as a king,
be ‘a more courageous man’, since he must be determined ‘to
administer a great many lies and deceptions’—for the benefit of

the ruled, Plato hastens to add. Which means, as we already know,
and as we learn here again from Plato’s reference to medicine, ‘for
the benefit of the state’. (Kant remarked once in a very different
spirit that the sentence ‘Truthfulness is the best policy’ might
indeed be questionable, whilst the sentence ‘Truthfulness is better
than policy’ is beyond dispute7.)
What kind of lies has Plato in mind when he exhorts his rulers
to use strong medicine? Grossman rightly emphasizes that Plato
means ‘propaganda, the technique of controlling the behaviour of ..
the bulk of the ruled majority’8. Certainly, Plato had these first in
his mind; but when Grossman suggests that the propaganda lies
were only intended for the consumption of the ruled, while the
rulers should be a fully enlightened intelligentsia, then I cannot
agree. I think, rather, that Plato’s complete break with anything
resembling Socrates’ intellectualism is nowhere more obvious than
in the place where he twice expresses his hope that even the rulers
themselves, at least after a few generations, might be induced to
believe his greatest propaganda lie; I mean his racialism, his Myth
of Blood and Soil, known as the Myth of the Metals in Man and of
the Earthborn. Here we see that Plato’s utilitarian and totalitarian
principles overrule everything, even the ruler’s privilege of
knowing, and of demanding to be told, the truth. The motive of
Plato’s wish that the rulers themselves should believe in the
propaganda lie is his hope of increasing its wholesome effect, i.e.
of strengthening the rule of the master race, and ultimately, of
arresting all political change.
II
Plato introduces his Myth of Blood and Soil with the blunt
admission that it is a fraud. ‘Well then’, says the Socrates of the
Republic, ‘could we perhaps fabricate one of those very handy lies
which indeed we mentioned just recently? With the help of one
single lordly lie we may, if we are lucky, persuade even the rulers
themselves—but at any rate the rest of the city.’9 It is interesting to
note the use of the term ‘persuade’. To persuade somebody to
believe a lie means, more precisely, to mislead or to hoax him; and
it would be more in tune with the frank cynicism of the passage to
translate ‘we may, if we are lucky, hoax even the rulers
themselves’. But Plato uses the term ‘persuasion’ very frequently,
and its occurrence here throws some light on other passages. It
may be taken as a warning that in similar passages he may have

propaganda lies in his mind; more especially where he advocates
that the statesman should rule ‘by means of both persuasion and
force’10.
After announcing his ‘lordly lie’, Plato, instead of proceeding
directly to the narration of his Myth, first develops a lengthy
preface, somewhat similar to the lengthy preface which precedes
his discovery of justice; an indication, I think, of his uneasiness. It
seems that he did not expect the proposal which follows to find
much favour with his readers. The Myth itself introduces two
ideas. The first is to strengthen the defence of the mother country;
it is the idea that the warriors of his city are autochthonous, ‘born
of the earth of their country’, and ready to defend their country
which is their mother. This old and well-known idea is certainly
not the reason for Plato’s hesitation (although the wording of the
dialogue cleverly suggests it). The second idea, however, ‘the rest
of the story’, is the myth of racialism: ‘God .. has put gold into
those who are capable of ruling, silver into the auxiliaries, and iron
and copper into the peasants and the other producing classes.’11
These metals are hereditary, they are racial characteristics. In this
passage, in which Plato, hesitatingly, first introduces his racialism,
he allows for the possibility that children may be born with an
admixture of another metal than those of their parents; and it must
be admitted that he here announces the following rule: if in one of
the lower classes ‘children are born with an admixture of gold and
silver, they shall .. be appointed guardians, and .. auxiliaries’. But
this concession is rescinded in later passages of the Republic (and
also in the Laws), especially in the story of the Fall of Man and of
the Number12, partially quoted in chapter 5 above. From this
passage we learn that any admixture of one of the base metals must
be excluded from the higher classes. The possibility of admixtures
and corresponding changes in status therefore only means that
nobly born but degenerate children may be pushed down, and not
that any of the base born may be lifted up. The way in which any
mixing of metals must lead to destruction is described in the
concluding passage of the story of the Fall of Man: ‘Iron will
mingle with silver and bronze with gold, and from this mixture
variation will be born and absurd irregularity; and whenever these
are born they will beget struggle and hostility. And this is how we
must describe the ancestry and birth of Dissension, wherever she
arises’13. It is in this light that we must consider that the Myth of
the Earthborn concludes with the cynical fabrication of a prophecy

by a fictitious oracle ‘that the city must perish when guarded by
iron and copper’14. Plato’s reluctance to proffer his racialism at
once in its more radical form indicates, I suppose, that he knew
how much it was opposed to the democratic and humanitarian
tendencies of his time.
If we consider Plato’s blunt admission that his Myth of Blood
and Soil is a propaganda lie, then the attitude of the commentators
towards the Myth is somewhat puzzling. Adam, for instance,
writes: ‘Without it, the present sketch of a state would be
incomplete. We require some guarantee for the permanence of the
city ..; and nothing could be more in keeping with the prevailing
moral and religious spirit of Plato’s .. education than that he
should find that guarantee in faith rather than in reason.’15 I agree
(though this is not quite what Adam meant) that nothing is more in
keeping with Plato’s totalitarian morality than his advocacy of
propaganda lies. But I do not quite understand how the religious
and idealistic commentator can declare, by implication, that
religion and faith are on the level of an opportunist lie. As a matter
of fact, Adam’s comment is reminiscent of Hobbes’
conventionalism, of the view that the tenets of religion, although
not true, are a most expedient and indispensable political device.
And this consideration shows us that Plato, after all, was more of a
conventionalist than one might think. He does not even stop short
of establishing a religious faith ‘by convention’ (we must credit
him with the frankness of his admission that it is only a
fabrication), while the reputed conventionalist Protagoras at least
believed that the laws, which are our making, are made with the
help of divine inspiration. It is hard to understand why those of
Plato’s commentators16 who praise him for fighting against the
subversive conventionalism of the Sophists, and for establishing a
spiritual naturalism ultimately based on religion, fail to censure
him for making a convention, or rather an invention, the ultimate
basis of religion. In fact, Plato’s attitude towards religion as
revealed by his ‘inspired lie’ is practically identical with that of
Critias, his beloved uncle, the brilliant leader of the Thirty Tyrants
who established an inglorious blood-regime in Athens after the
Peloponnesian war. Critias, a poet, was the first to glorify
propaganda lies, whose invention he described in forceful verses
eulogizing the wise and cunning man who fabricated religion, in
order to ‘persuade’ the people, i.e. to threaten them into
submission.17

‘Then came, it seems, that wise and cunning man, The first
inventor of the fear of gods ... He framed a tale, a most alluring
doctrine, Concealing truth by veils of lying lore. He told of the
abode of awful gods, Up in revolving vaults, whence thunder roars
And lightning’s fearful flashes blind the eye ... He thus encircled
men by bonds of fear; Surrounding them by gods in fair abodes,
He charmed them by his spells, and daunted them—And
lawlessness turned into law and order.’
In Critias’ view, religion is nothing but the lordly lie of a great
and clever statesman. Plato’s views are strikingly similar, both in
the introduction of the Myth in the Republic (where he bluntly
admits that the Myth is a lie) and in the Laws where he says that
the installation of rites and of gods is ‘a matter for a great
thinker’l8.—But is this the whole truth about Plato’s religious
attitude? Was he nothing but an opportunist in this field, and was
the very different spirit of his earlier works merely Socratic? There
is of course no way of deciding this question with certainty, though
I feel, intuitively, that there may sometimes be a more genuine
religious feeling expressed even in the later works. But I believe
that wherever Plato considers religious matters in their relation to
politics, his political opportunism sweeps all other feelings aside.
Thus Plato demands, in the Laws, the severest punishment even for
honest and honourable people19 if their opinions concerning the
gods deviate from those held by the state. Their souls are to be
treated by a Nocturnal Council of inquisitors20, and if they do not
recant or if they repeat the offence, the charge of impiety means
death. Has he forgotten that Socrates had fallen a victim to that
very charge?
That it is mainly state interest which inspires these demands,
rather than interest in the religious faith as such, is indicated by
Plato’s central religious doctrine. The gods, he teaches in the Laws,
punish severely all those on the wrong side in the conflict between
good and evil, a conflict which is explained as that between
collectivism and individualism21. And the gods, he insists, take an
active interest in men, they are not merely spectators. It is
impossible to appease them. Neither through prayers nor through
sacrifices can they be moved to abstain from punishment22. The
political interest behind this teaching is clear, and it is made even
clearer by Plato’s demand that the state must suppress all doubt
about any part of this politico-religious dogma, and especially
about the doctrine that the gods never abstain from punishment.

Plato’s opportunism and his theory of lies makes it, of course,
difficult to interpret what he says. How far did he believe in his
theory of justice? How far did he believe in the truth of the
religious doctrines he preached? Was he perhaps himself an
atheist, in spite of his demand for the punishment of other (lesser)
atheists? Although we cannot hope to answer any of these
questions definitely, it is, I believe, difficult, and methodologically
unsound, not to give Plato at least the benefit of the doubt. And
especially the fundamental sincerity of his belief that there is an
urgent need to arrest all change can, I think, hardly be questioned.
(I shall return to this in chapter 10.) On the other hand, we cannot
doubt that Plato subjects the Socratic love of truth to the more
fundamental principle that the rule of the master class must be
strengthened.
It is interesting, however, to note that Plato’s theory of truth is
slightly less radical than his theory of justice. Justice, we have
seen, is defined, practically, as that which serves the interest of his
totalitarian state. It would have been possible, of course, to define
the concept of truth in the same utilitarian or pragmatist fashion.
The Myth is true, Plato could have said, since anything that serves
the interest of my state must be believed and therefore must be
called ‘true’; and there must be no other criterion of truth. In
theory, an analogous step has actually been taken by the pragmatist
successors of Hegel; in practice, it has been taken by Hegel himself
and his racialist successors. But Plato retained enough of the
Socratic spirit to admit candidly that he was lying. The step taken
by the school of Hegel was one that could never have occurred, I
think, to any companion of Socrates23.
III
So much for the role played by the Idea of Truth in Plato’s best
state. But apart from justice and Truth, we have still to consider
some further Ideas, such as Goodness, Beauty, and Happiness, if
we wish to remove the objections, raised in chapter 6, against our
interpretation of Plato’s political programme as purely totalitarian,
and as based on historicism. An approach to the discussion of these
Ideas, and also to that of Wisdom, which has been partly discussed
in the last chapter, can be made by considering the somewhat
negative result reached by our discussion of the Idea of Truth. For
this result raises a new problem: Why does Plato demand that the
philosophers should be kings or the kings philosophers, if he

defines the philosopher as a lover of truth, insisting, on the other
hand, that the king must be ‘more courageous’, and use lies?
The only reply to this question is, of course, that Plato has, in
fact, something very different in mind when he uses the term
‘philosopher’. And indeed, we have seen in the last chapter that his
philosopher is not the devoted seeker for wisdom, but its proud
possessor. He is a learned man, a sage. What Plato demands,
therefore, is the rule of learnedness—sophocracy, if I may so call
it. In order to understand this demand, we must try to find what
kind of functions make it desirable that the ruler of Plato’s state
should be a possessor of knowledge, a ‘fully qualified
philosopher’, as Plato says. The functions to be considered can be
divided into two main groups, namely those connected with the
foundation of the state, and those connected with its preservation.
IV
The first and the most important function of the philosopher
king is that of the city’s founder and lawgiver. It is clear why Plato
needs a philosopher for this task. If the state is to be stable, then it
must be a true copy of the divine Form or Idea of the State. But
only a philosopher who is fully proficient in the highest of
sciences, in dialectics, is able to see, and to copy, the heavenly
Original. This point receives much emphasis in the part of the
Republic in which Plato develops his arguments for the
sovereignty of the philosophers24. Philosophers ‘love to see the
truth’, and a real lover always loves to see the whole, not merely
the parts. Thus he does not love, as ordinary people do, sensible
things and their ‘beautiful sounds and colours and shapes’, but he
wants ‘to see, and to admire the real nature of beauty’—the Form
or Idea of Beauty. In this way, Plato gives the term philosopher a
new meaning, that of a lover and a seer of the divine world of
Forms or Ideas. As such, the philosopher is the man who may
become the founder of a virtuous city25: ‘The philosopher who has
communion with the divine’ may be ‘overwhelmed by the urge to
realize .. his heavenly vision’, of the ideal city and of its ideal
citizens. He is like a draughtsman or a painter who has ‘the divine
as his model’. Only true philosophers can ‘sketch the ground-plan
of the city’, for they alone can see the original, and can copy it, by
‘letting their eyes wander to and fro, from the model to the picture,
and back from the picture to the model’.

As ‘a painter of constitutions’26, the philosopher must be
helped by the light of goodness and of wisdom. A few remarks will
be added concerning these two ideas, and their significance for the
philosopher in his function as a founder of the city.
Plato’s Idea of the Good is the highest in the hierarchy of
Forms. It is the sun of the divine world of Forms or Ideas, which
not only sheds light on all the other members, but is the source of
their existence27. It is also the source or cause of all knowledge and
all truth28. The power of seeing, of appreciating, of knowing the
Good is thus indispensable29 to the dialectician. Since it is the sun
and the source of light in the world of Forms, it enables the
philosopher-painter to discern his objects. Its function is therefore
of the greatest importance for the founder of the city. But this
purely formal information is all we get. Plato’s Idea of the Good
nowhere plays a more direct ethical or political role; never do we
hear which deeds are good, or produce good, apart from the wellknown collectivist moral code whose precepts are introduced
without recourse to the Idea of Good. Remarks that the Good is the
aim, that it is desired by every man30, do not enrich our
information. This empty formalism is still more marked in the
Philebus, where the Good is identified31 with the Idea of ‘measure’
or ‘mean’. And when I read the report that Plato, in his famous
lecture ‘On the Good’, disappointed an uneducated audience by
defining the Good as ‘the class of the determinate conceived as a
unity’, then my sympathy is with the audience. In the Republic,
Plato says frankly32 that he cannot explain what he means by ‘the
Good’. The only practical suggestion we ever get is the one
mentioned at the beginning of chapter 4—that good is everything
that preserves, and evil everything that leads to corruption or
degeneration. (‘Good’ does not, however, seem to be here the Idea
of Good, but rather a property of things which makes them
resemble the ideas.) Good is, accordingly, an unchanging, an
arrested state of things; it is the state of things at rest.
This does not seem to carry us very far beyond Plato’s political
totalitarianism; and the analysis of Plato’s Idea of Wisdom leads to
equally disappointing results. Wisdom, as we have seen, does not
mean to Plato the Socratic insight into one’s own limitations; nor
does it mean what most of us would expect, a warm interest in, and
a helpful understanding of, humanity and human affairs. Plato’s
wise men, highly preoccupied with the problems of a superior
world, ‘have no time to look down at the affairs of men ..; they

look upon, and hold fast to, the ordered and the measured’. It is the
right kind of learning that makes a man wise: ‘Philosophic natures
are lovers of that kind of learning which reveals to them a reality
that exists for ever and is not harassed by generation and
degeneration.’ It does not seem that Plato’s treatment of wisdom
can carry us beyond the ideal of arresting change.
V
Although the analysis of the functions of the city’s founder has
not revealed any new ethical elements in Plato’s doctrine, it has
shown that there is a definite reason why the founder of the city
must be a philosopher. But this does not fully justify the demand
for the permanent sovereignty of the philosopher. It only explains
why the philosopher must be the first lawgiver, but not why he is
needed as the permanent ruler, especially since none of the later
rulers must introduce any change. For a full justification of the
demand that the philosophers should rule, we must therefore
proceed to analyse the tasks connected with the city’s preservation.
We know from Plato’s sociological theories that the state, once
established, will continue to be stable as long as there is no split in
the unity of the master class. The bringing up of that class is,
therefore, the great preserving function of the sovereign, and a
function which must continue as long as the state exists. How far
does it justify the demand that a philosopher must rule? To answer
this question, we distinguish again, within this function, between
two different activities: the supervision of education, and the
supervision of eugenic breeding.
Why should the director of education be a philosopher? Why is
it not sufficient, once the state and its educational system are
established, to put an experienced general, a soldier-king, in charge
of it? The answer that the educational system must provide not
only soldiers but philosophers, and therefore needs philosophers as
well as soldiers as supervisors, is obviously unsatisfactory; for if
no philosophers were needed as directors of education and as
permanent rulers, then there would be no need for the educational
system to produce new ones. The requirements of the educational
system cannot as such justify the need for philosophers in Plato’s
state, or the postulate that the rulers must be philosophers. This
would be different, of course, if Plato’s education had an
individualistic aim, apart from its aim to serve the interest of the
state; for example, the aim to develop philosophical faculties for

their own sake. But when we see, as we did in the preceding
chapter, how frightened Plato was of permitting anything like
independent thought33; and when we now see that the ultimate
theoretical aim of this philosophic education was merely a
‘Knowledge of the Idea of the Good’ which is incapable of giving
an articulate account of this Idea, then we begin to realize that this
cannot be the explanation. And this impression is strengthened if
we remember chapter 4, where we have seen that Plato also
demanded restrictions in the Athenian ‘musical’ education. The
great importance which Plato attaches to a philosophical education
of the rulers must be explained by other reasons—by reasons
which must be purely political.
The main reason I can see is the need for increasing to the
utmost the authority of the rulers. If the education of the auxiliaries
functions properly, there will be plenty of good soldiers.
Outstanding military faculties may therefore be insufficient to
establish an unchallenged and unchallengeable authority. This
must be based on higher claims. Plato bases it upon the claims of
supernatural, mystical powers which he develops in his leaders.
They are not like other men. They belong to another world, they
communicate with the divine. Thus the philosopher king seems to
be, partly, a copy of a tribal priest-king, an institution which we
have mentioned in connection with Heraclitus. (The institution of
tribal priest-kings or medicine-men or shamans seems also to have
influenced the old Pythagorean sect, with their surprisingly naive
tribal taboos. Apparently, most of these were dropped even before
Plato. But the claim of the Pythagoreans to a supernatural basis of
their authority remained.) Thus Plato’s philosophical education has
a definite political function. It puts a mark on the rulers, and it
establishes a barrier between the rulers and the ruled. (This has
remained a major function of ‘higher’ education down to our own
time.) Platonic wisdom is acquired largely for the sake of
establishing a permanent political class rule. It can be described as
political ‘medicine’, giving mystic powers to its possessors, the
medicine-men.34
But this cannot be the full answer to our question of the
functions of the philosopher in the state. It means, rather, that the
question why a philosopher is needed has only been shifted, and
that we would have now to raise the analogous question of the
practical political functions of the shaman or the medicine man.
Plato must have had some definite aim when he devised his

specialized philosophic training. We must look for a permanent
function of the ruler, analogous to the temporary function of the
lawgiver. The only hope of discovering such a function seems to
be in the field of breeding the master race.
VI
The best way to find out why a philosopher is needed as a
permanent ruler is to ask the question: What happens, according to
Plato, to a state which is not permanently ruled by a philosopher?
Plato has given a clear answer to this question. If the guardians of
the state, even of a very perfect one, are unaware of Pythagorean
lore and of the Platonic Number, then the race of the guardians,
and with it the state, must degenerate.
Racialism thus takes up a more central part in Plato’s political
programme than one would expect at first sight. Just as the
Platonic racial or nuptial Number provides the setting for his
descriptive sociology, ‘the setting in which Plato’s Philosophy of
History is framed’ (as Adam puts it), so it also provides the setting
of Plato’s political demand for the sovereignty of the philosophers.
After what has been said in chapter 4 about the graziers’ or cattle
breeders’ background of Plato’s state, we are perhaps not quite
unprepared to find that his king is a breeder king. But it may still
surprise some that his philosopher turns out to be a philosophic
breeder. The need for scientific, for mathematico-dialectical and
philosophical breeding is not the least of the arguments behind the
claim for the sovereignty of the philosophers.
It has been shown in chapter 4 how the problem of obtaining a
pure breed of human watch-dogs is emphasized and elaborated in
the earlier parts of the Republic. But so far we have not met with
any plausible reason why only a genuine and fully qualified
philosopher should be a proficient and successful political breeder.
And yet, as every breeder of dogs or horses or birds knows,
rational breeding is impossible without a pattern, an aim to guide
him in his efforts, an ideal which he may try to approach by the
methods of mating and of selecting. Without such a standard, he
could never decide which offspring is ‘good enough’; he could
never speak of the difference between ‘good offspring’ and ‘bad
offspring’. But this standard corresponds exactly to a Platonic Idea
of the race which he intends to breed.
Just as only the true philosopher, the dialectician, can see,
according to Plato, the divine original of the city, so it is only the

dialectician who can see that other divine original—the Form or
Idea of Man. Only he is capable of copying this model, of calling it
down from Heaven to Earth35, and of realizing it here. It is a kingly
Idea, this Idea of Man. It does not, as some have thought, represent
what is common to all men; it is not the universal concept ‘man’. It
is, rather, the godlike original of man, an unchanging superman; it
is a super-Greek, and a super-master. The philosopher must try to
realize on earth what Plato describes as the race of ‘the most
constant, the most virile, and, within the limits of possibilities, the
most beautifully formed men ..: nobly born, and of awe-inspiring
character’36. It is to be a race of men and women who are ‘godlike
if not divine .. sculptured in perfect beauty’37—a lordly race,
destined by nature to kingship and mastery.
We see that the two fundamental functions of the philosopher
king are analogous: he has to copy the divine original of the city,
and he has to copy the divine original of man. He is the only one
who is able, and who has the urge, ‘to realize, in the individual as
well as in the city, his heavenly vision’38.
Now we can understand why Plato drops his first hint that a
more than ordinary excellence is needed in his rulers in the same
place where he first claims that the principles of animal breeding
must be applied to the race of men. We are, he says, most careful
in breeding animals. ‘If you did not breed them in this way, don’t
you think that the race of your birds or your dogs would quickly
degenerate?’ When inferring from this that man must be bred in
the same careful way, ‘Socrates’ exclaims: ‘Good heavens!.. What
surpassing excellence we shall have to demand from our rulers, if
the same principles apply to the race of men!’39 This exclamation
is significant; it is one of the first hints that the rulers may
constitute a class of ‘surpassing excellence ‘with status and
training of their own; and it thus prepares us for the demand that
they ought to be philosophers. But the passage is even more
significant in so far as it directly leads to Plato’s demand that it
must be the duty of the rulers, as doctors of the race of men, to
administer lies and deception. Lies are necessary, Plato asserts, ‘if
your herd is to reach highest perfection’; for this needs
‘arrangements that must be kept secret from all but the rulers, if we
wish to keep the herd of guardians really free from disunion’.
Indeed, the appeal (quoted above) to the rulers for more courage in
administering lies as a medicine is made in this connection; it
prepares the reader for the next demand, considered by Plato as

particularly important. He decrees40 that the rulers should fabricate,
for the purpose of mating the young auxiliaries, ‘an ingenious
system of balloting, so that the persons who have been
disappointed .. may blame their bad luck, and not the rulers’, who
are, secretly, to engineer the ballot. And immediately after this
despicable advice for dodging the admission of responsibility (by
putting it into the mouth of Socrates, Plato libels his great teacher),
‘Socrates’ makes a suggestion41 which is soon taken up and
elaborated by Glaucon and which we may therefore call the
Glauconic Edict. I mean the brutal law42 which imposes on
everybody of either sex the duty of submitting, for the duration of
a war, to the wishes of the brave: ‘As long as the war lasts,..
nobody may say “No” to him. Accordingly, if a soldier wishes to
make love to anybody, whether male or female, this law will make
him more eager to carry off the price of valour.’ The state, it is
carefully pointed out, will thereby obtain two distinct benefits—
more heroes, owing to the incitement, and again more heroes,
owing to the increased numbers of children from heroes. (The
latter benefit, as the most important one from the point of view of a
long-term racial policy, is put into the mouth of ‘Socrates’.)
VII
No special philosophical training is required for this kind of
breeding. Philosophical breeding, however, plays its main part in
counteracting the dangers of degeneration. In order to fight these
dangers, a fully qualified philosopher is needed, i.e. one who is
trained in pure mathematics (including solid geometry), pure
astronomy, pure harmonics, and, the crowning achievement of all,
in dialectics. Only he who knows the secrets of mathematical
eugenics, of the Platonic Number, can bring back to man, and
preserve for him, the happiness enjoyed before the Fall43. All this
should be borne in mind when, after the announcement of the
Glauconic Edict (and after an interlude dealing with the natural
distinction between Greeks and Barbarians, corresponding,
according to Plato, to that between masters and slaves), the
doctrine is enunciated which Plato carefully marks as his central
and most sensational political demand—the sovereignty of the
philosopher king. This demand alone, he teaches, can put an end to
the evils of social life; to the evil rampant in states, i.e. political
instability, as well as to its more hidden cause, the evil rampant in

the members of the race of men, i.e. racial degeneration. This is
the passage.44
‘Well,’ says Socrates, ‘I am now about to dive into that topic
which I compared before to the greatest wave of all. Yet I must
speak, even though I foresee that this will bring upon me a deluge
of laughter. Indeed, I can see it now, this very wave, breaking over
my head into an uproar of laughter and defamation ..’—‘Out with
the story!’ says Glaucon. ‘Unless,’ says Socrates, ‘unless, in their
cities, philosophers are vested with the might of kings, or those
now called kings and oligarchs become genuine and fully qualified
philosophers; and unless these two, political might and philosophy,
are fused (while the many who nowadays follow their natural
inclination for only one of these two are suppressed by force),
unless this happens, my dear Glaucon, there can be no rest; and the
evil will not cease to be rampant in the cities—nor, I believe, in the
race of men.’ (To which Kant wisely replied: ‘That kings should
become philosophers, or philosophers kings, is not likely to
happen; nor would it be desirable, since the possession of power
invariably debases the free judgement of reason. It is, however,
indispensable that a king—or a kingly, i.e. self-ruling, people—
should not suppress philosophers but leave them the right of public
utterance.’45)
This important Platonic passage has been quite appropriately
described as the key to the whole work. Its last words, ‘nor, I
believe, in the race of men’, are, I think, an afterthought of
comparatively minor importance in this place. It is, however,
necessary to comment upon them, since the habit of idealizing
Plato has led to the interpretation46 that Plato speaks here about
‘humanity’, extending his promise of salvation from the scope of
the cities to that of ‘mankind as a whole’. It must be said, in this
connection, that the ethical category of ‘humanity’ as something
that transcends the distinction of nations, races, and classes, is
entirely foreign to Plato. In fact, we have sufficient evidence of
Plato’s hostility towards the equalitarian creed, a hostility which is
seen in his attitude towards Antisthenes47, an old disciple and
friend of Socrates. Antisthenes also belonged to the school of
Gorgias, like Alcidamas and Lycophron, whose equalitarian
theories he seems to have extended into the doctrine of the
brotherhood of all men, and of the universal empire of men48. This
creed is attacked in the Republic by correlating the natural
inequality of Greeks and Barbarians to that of masters and slaves;

and it so happens that this attack is launched49 immediately before
the key passage we are here considering. For these and other
reasons50, it seems safe to assume that Plato, when speaking of the
evil rampant in the race of men, alluded to a theory with which his
readers would be sufficiently acquainted at this place, namely, to
his theory that the welfare of the state depends, ultimately, upon
the ‘nature’ of the individual members of the ruling class; and that
their nature, and the nature of their race, or offspring, is threatened,
in turn, by the evils of an individualistic education, and, more
important still, by racial degeneration. Plato’s remark, with its
clear allusion to the opposition between divine rest and the evil of
change and decay, foreshadows the story of the Number and the
Fall of Man51.
It is very appropriate that Plato should allude to his racialism in
this key passage in which he enunciates his most important
political demand. For without the ‘genuine and fully qualified
philosopher’, trained in all those sciences which are prerequisite to
eugenics, the state is lost. In his story of the Number and the Fall
of Man, Plato tells us that one of the first and fatal sins of omission
committed by the degenerate guardians will be their loss of interest
in eugenics, in watching and testing the purity of the race: ‘Hence
rulers will be ordained who are altogether unfit for their task as
guardians; namely, to watch, and to test, the metals in the races
(which are Hesiod’s races as well as yours), gold and silver and
bronze and iron.’52
It is ignorance of the mysterious nuptial Number which leads to
all that. But the Number was undoubtedly Plato’s own invention.
(It presupposes pure harmonics, which in turn presupposes solid
geometry, a new science at the time when the Republic was
written.) Thus we see that nobody but Plato himself knew the
secret of, and held the key to, true guardianship. But this can mean
only one thing. The philosopher king is Plato himself, and the
Republic is Plato’s own claim for kingly power—to the power
which he thought his due, uniting in himself, as he did, both the
claims of the philosopher and of the descendant and legitimate heir
of Codrus the martyr, the last of Athens’ kings, who, according to
Plato, had sacrificed himself ‘in order to preserve the kingdom for
his children’.

VIII
Once this conclusion has been reached, many things which
otherwise would remain unrelated become connected and clear. It
can hardly be doubted, for instance, that Plato’s work, full of
allusions as it is to contemporary problems and characters, was
meant by its author not so much as a theoretical treatise, but as a
topical political manifesto. ‘We do Plato the gravest of wrongs’,
says A. E. Taylor, ‘if we forget that the Republic is no mere
collection of theoretical discussions about government .. but a
serious project of practical reform put forward by an Athenian ..,
set on fire, like Shelley, with a “passion for reforming the
world”.’53 This is undoubtedly true, and we could have concluded
from this consideration alone that, in describing his philosopher
kings, Plato must have thought of some of the contemporary
philosophers. But in the days when the Republic was written, there
were in Athens only three outstanding men who might have
claimed to be philosophers: Antisthenes, Isocrates, and Plato
himself. If we approach the Republic with this in mind, we find at
once that, in the discussion of the characteristics of the philosopher
kings, there is a lengthy passage which is clearly marked out by
Plato as containing personal allusions. It begins54 with an
unmistakable allusion to a popular character, namely Alcibiades,
and ends by openly mentioning a name (that of Theages), and with
a reference of ‘Socrates’ to himself55. Its upshot is that only very
few can be described as true philosophers, eligible for the post of
philosopher king. The nobly born Alcibiades, who was of the right
type, deserted philosophy, in spite of Socrates’ attempts to save
him. Deserted and defenceless, philosophy was claimed by
unworthy suitors. Ultimately, ‘there is left only a handful of men
who are worthy of being associated with philosophy’. From the
point of view we have reached, we would have to expect that the
‘unworthy suitors’ are Antisthenes and Isocrates and their school
(and that they are the same people whom Plato demands to have
‘suppressed by force’, as he says in the key-passage of the
philosopher king). And, indeed, there is some independent
evidence corroborating this expectation56. Similarly, we should
expect that the ‘handful of men who are worthy’ includes Plato
and, perhaps, some of his friends (possibly Dio); and, indeed, a
continuation of this passage leaves little doubt that Plato speaks
here of himself: ‘He who belongs to this small band .. can see the
madness of the many, and the general corruption of all public

affairs. The philosopher .. is like a man in a cage of wild beasts. He
will not share the injustice of the many, but his power does not
suffice for continuing his fight alone, surrounded as he is by a
world of savages. He would be killed before he could do any good,
to his city or to his friends ... Having duly considered all these
points, he will hold his peace, and confine his efforts to his own
work ..’57. The strong resentment expressed in these sour and most
un-Socratic58 words marks them clearly as Plato’s own. For a full
appreciation, however, of this personal confession, it must be
compared with the following: ‘It is not in accordance with nature
that the skilled navigator should beg the unskilled sailors to accept
his command; nor that the wise man should wait at the doors of the
rich ... But the true and natural procedure is that the sick, whether
rich or poor, should hasten to the doctor’s door. Likewise should
those who need to be ruled besiege the door of him who can rule;
and never should a ruler beg them to accept his rule, if he is any
good at all.’ Who can miss the sound of an immense personal pride
in this passage? Here am I, says Plato, your natural ruler, the
philosopher king who knows how to rule. If you want me, you
must come to me, and if you insist, I may become your ruler. But I
shall not come begging to you.
Did he believe that they would come? Like many great works
of literature, the Republic shows traces that its author experienced
exhilarating and extravagant hopes of success59, alternating with
periods of despair. Sometimes, at least, Plato hoped that they
would come; that the success of his work, the fame of his wisdom,
would bring them along. Then again, he felt that they would only
be incited to furious attacks; that all he would bring upon himself
was ‘an uproar of laughter and defamation’—perhaps even death.
Was he ambitious? He was reaching for the stars—for godlikeness. I sometimes wonder whether part of the enthusiasm for
Plato is not due to the fact that he gave expression to many secret
dreams60. Even where he argues against ambition, we cannot but
feel that he is inspired by it. The philosopher, he assures us61, is not
ambitious; although ‘destined to rule, he is the least eager for it’.
But the reason given is—that his status is too high. He who has had
communion with the divine may descend from his heights to the
mortals below, sacrificing himself for the sake of the interest of the
state. He is not eager; but as a natural ruler and saviour, he is ready
to come. The poor mortals need him. Without him the state must

perish, for he alone knows the secret of how to preserve it—the
secret of arresting degeneration ...
I think we must face the fact that behind the sovereignty of the
philosopher king stands the quest for power. The beautiful portrait
of the sovereign is a self-portrait. When we have recovered from
the shock of this finding, we may look anew at the awe-inspiring
portrait; and if we can fortify ourselves with a small dose of
Socrates’ irony then we may cease to find it so terrifying. We may
begin to discern its human, indeed, its only too human features. We
may even begin to feel a little sorry for Plato, who had to be
satisfied with establishing the first professorship, instead of the
first kingship, of philosophy; who could never realize his dream,
the kingly Idea which he had formed after his own image. Fortified
by our dose of irony, we may even find, in Plato’s story, a
melancholy resemblance to that innocent and unconscious little
satire on Platonism, the story of the Ugly Dachshund, of Tono, the
Great Dane, who forms his kingly Idea of Great Dog’ after his own
image (but who happily finds in the end that he is Great Dog
himself)62.
What a monument of human smallness is this idea of the
philosopher king. What a contrast between it and the simplicity
and humaneness of Socrates, who warned the statesman against the
danger of being dazzled by his own power, excellence, and
wisdom, and who tried to teach him what matters most—that we
are all frail human beings. What a decline from this world of irony
and reason and truthfulness down to Plato’s kingdom of the sage
whose magical powers raise him high above ordinary men;
although not quite high enough to forgo the use of lies, or to
neglect the sorry trade of every shaman—the selling of spells, of
breeding spells, in exchange for power over his fellow-men.

Chapter 9: Aestheticism, Perfectionism, Utopianism
‘Everything has got to be smashed to start with. Our whole
damned civilization has got to go, before we can bring any decency
into the world.’
—‘Mourlan’, in Du Gard’s Les Thibaults.
Inherent in Plato’s programme there is a certain approach
towards politics which, I believe, is most dangerous. Its analysis is
of great practical importance from the point of view of rational
social engineering. The Platonic approach I have in mind can be

described as that of Utopian engineering, as opposed to another
kind of social engineering which I consider as the only rational
one, and which may be described by the name of piecemeal
engineering. The Utopian approach is the more dangerous as it
may seem to be the obvious alternative to an out-and-out
historicism—to a radically historicist approach which implies that
we cannot alter the course of history; at the same time, it appears to
be a necessary complement to a less radical historicism, like that of
Plato, which permits human interference.
The Utopian approach may be described as follows. Any
rational action must have a certain aim. It is rational in the same
degree as it pursues its aim consciously and consistently, and as it
determines its means according to this end. To choose the end is
therefore the first thing we have to do if we wish to act rationally;
and we must be careful to determine our real or ultimate ends,
from which we must distinguish clearly those intermediate or
partial ends which actually are only means, or steps on the way, to
the ultimate end. If we neglect this distinction, then we must also
neglect to ask whether these partial ends are likely to promote the
ultimate end, and accordingly, we must fail to act rationally. These
principles, if applied to the realm of political activity, demand that
we must determine our ultimate political aim, or the Ideal State,
before taking any practical action. Only when this ultimate aim is
determined, in rough outline at least, only when we are in
possession of something like a blueprint of the society at which we
aim, only then can we begin to consider the best ways and means
for its realization, and to draw up a plan for practical action. These
are the necessary preliminaries of any practical political move that
can be called rational, and especially of social engineering.
This, in brief, is the methodological approach which I call
Utopian engineering1. It is convincing and attractive. In fact, it is
just the kind of methodological approach to attract all those who
are either unaffected by historicist prejudices or reacting against
them. This makes it only the more dangerous, and its criticism the
more imperative.
Before proceeding to criticize Utopian engineering in detail, I
wish to outline another approach to social engineering, namely,
that of piecemeal engineering. It is an approach which I think to be
methodologically sound. The politician who adopts this method
may or may not have a blueprint of society before his mind, he
may or may not hope that mankind will one day realize an ideal

state, and achieve happiness and perfection on earth. But he will be
aware that perfection, if at all attainable, is far distant, and that
every generation of men, and therefore also the living, have a
claim; perhaps not so much a claim to be made happy, for there are
no institutional means of making a man happy, but a claim not to
be made unhappy, where it can be avoided. They have a claim to
be given all possible help, if they suffer. The piecemeal engineer
will, accordingly, adopt the method of searching for, and fighting
against, the greatest and most urgent evils of society, rather than
searching for, and fighting for, its greatest ultimate good2. This
difference is far from being merely verbal. In fact, it is most
important. It is the difference between a reasonable method of
improving the lot of man, and a method which, if really tried, may
easily lead to an intolerable increase in human suffering. It is the
difference between a method which can be applied at any moment,
and a method whose advocacy may easily become a means of
continually postponing action until a later date, when conditions
are more favourable. And it is also the difference between the only
method of improving matters which has so far been really
successful, at any time, and in any place (Russia included, as will
be seen), and a method which, wherever it has been tried, has led
only to the use of violence in place of reason, and if not to its own
abandonment, at any rate to that of its original blueprint.
In favour of his method, the piecemeal engineer can claim that
a systematic fight against suffering and injustice and war is more
likely to be supported by the approval and agreement of a great
number of people than the fight for the establishment of some
ideal. The existence of social evils, that is to say, of social
conditions under which many men are suffering, can be
comparatively well established. Those who suffer can judge for
themselves, and the others can hardly deny that they would not like
to change places. It is infinitely more difficult to reason about an
ideal society. Social life is so complicated that few men, or none at
all, could judge a blueprint for social engineering on the grand
scale; whether it be practicable; whether it would result in a real
improvement; what kind of suffering it may involve; and what may
be the means for its realization. As opposed to this, blueprints for
piecemeal engineering are comparatively simple. They are
blueprints for single institutions, for health and unemployed
insurance, for instance, or arbitration courts, or anti-depression
budgeting3, or educational reform. If they go wrong, the damage is

not very great, and a re-adjustment not very difficult. They are less
risky, and for this very reason less controversial. But if it is easier
to reach a reasonable agreement about existing evils and the means
of combating them than it is about an ideal good and the means of
its realization, then there is also more hope that by using the
piecemeal method we may get over the very greatest practical
difficulty of all reasonable political reform, namely, the use of
reason, instead of passion and violence, in executing the
programme. There will be a possibility of reaching a reasonable
compromise and therefore of achieving the improvement by
democratic methods. (‘Compromise’ is an ugly word, but it is
important for us to learn its proper use. Institutions are inevitably
the result of a compromise with circumstances, interests, etc.,
though as persons we should resist influences of this kind.)
As opposed to that, the Utopian attempt to realize an ideal
state, using a blueprint of society as a whole, is one which
demands a strong centralized rule of a few, and which therefore is
likely to lead to a dictatorship4. This I consider a criticism of the
Utopian approach; for I have tried to show, in the chapter on the
Principle of Leadership, that an authoritarian rule is a most
objectionable form of government. Some points not touched upon
in that chapter furnish us with even more direct arguments against
the Utopian approach. One of the difficulties faced by a benevolent
dictator is to find whether the effects of his measures agree with
his good intentions (as de Tocqueville saw clearly more than a
hundred years ago5). The difficulty arises out of the fact that
authoritarianism must discourage criticism; accordingly, the
benevolent dictator will not easily hear of complaints concerning
the measures he has taken. But without some such check, he can
hardly find out whether his measures achieve the desired
benevolent aim. The situation must become even worse for the
Utopian engineer. The reconstruction of society is a big
undertaking which must cause considerable inconvenience to
many, and for a considerable span of time. Accordingly, the
Utopian engineer will have to be deaf to many complaints; in fact,
it will be part of his business to suppress unreasonable objections.
(He will say, like Lenin, ‘You can’t make an omelette without
breaking eggs.’) But with it, he must invariably suppress
reasonable criticism also. Another difficulty of Utopian
engineering is related to the problem of the dictator’s successor. In
chapter 7 I have mentioned certain aspects of this problem.

Utopian engineering raises a difficulty analogous to but even more
serious than the one which faces the benevolent tyrant who tries to
find an equally benevolent successor (see note 25 to chapter 7).
The very sweep of such a Utopian undertaking makes it
improbable that it will realize its ends during the lifetime of one
social engineer, or group of engineers. And if the successors do not
pursue the same ideal, then all the sufferings of the people for the
sake of the ideal may have been in vain.
A generalization of this argument leads to a further criticism of
the Utopian approach. This approach, it is clear, can be of practical
value only if we assume that the original blueprint, perhaps with
certain adjustments, remains the basis of the work until it is
completed. But that will take some time. It will be a time of
revolutions, both political and spiritual, and of new experiments
and experience in the political field. It is therefore to be expected
that ideas and ideals will change. What had appeared the ideal state
to the people who made the original blueprint, may not appear so
to their successors. If that is granted, then the whole approach
breaks down. The method of first establishing an ultimate political
aim and then beginning to move towards it is futile if we admit that
the aim may be considerably changed during the process of its
realization. It may at any moment turn out that the steps so far
taken actually lead away from the realization of the new aim. And
if we change our direction according to the new aim, then we
expose ourselves to the same risk again. In spite of all the
sacrifices made, we may never get anywhere at all. Those who
prefer one step towards a distant ideal to the realization of a
piecemeal compromise should always remember that if the ideal is
very distant, it may even become difficult to say whether the step
taken was towards or away from it. This is especially so if the
course should proceed by zigzag steps, or, in Hegel’s jargon,
‘dialectically’, or if it is not clearly planned at all. (This bears upon
the old and somewhat childish question of how far the end can
justify the means. Apart from claiming that no end could ever
justify all means, I think that a fairly concrete and realizable end
may justify temporary measures which a more distant ideal never
could6.)
We see now that the Utopian approach can be saved only by
the Platonic belief in one absolute and unchanging ideal, together
with two further assumptions, namely (a) that there are rational
methods to determine once and for all what this ideal is, and (b)

what the best means of its realization are. Only such far-reaching
assumptions could prevent us from declaring the Utopian
methodology to be utterly futile. But even Plato himself and the
most ardent Platonists would admit that (a) is certainly not true;
that there is no rational method for determining the ultimate aim,
but, if anything, only some kind of intuition. Any difference of
opinion between Utopian engineers must therefore lead, in the
absence of rational methods, to the use of power instead of reason,
i.e. to violence. If any progress in any definite direction is made at
all, then it is made in spite of the method adopted, not because of
it. The success may be due, for instance, to the excellence of the
leaders; but we must never forget that excellent leaders cannot be
produced by rational methods, but only by luck.
It is important to understand this criticism properly; I do not
criticize the ideal by claiming that an ideal can never be realized,
that it must always remain a Utopia. This would not be a valid
criticism, for many things have been realized which have once
been dogmatically declared to be unrealizable, for instance, the
establishment of institutions for securing civil peace, i.e. for the
prevention of crime within the state; and I think that, for instance,
the establishment of corresponding institutions for the prevention
of international crime, i.e. armed aggression or blackmail, though
often branded as Utopian, is not even a very difficult problem7.
What I criticize under the name Utopian engineering recommends
the reconstruction of society as a whole, i.e. very sweeping
changes whose practical consequences are hard to calculate, owing
to our limited experiences. It claims to plan rationally for the
whole of society, although we do not possess anything like the
factual knowledge which would be necessary to make good such
an ambitious claim. We cannot possess such knowledge since we
have insufficient practical experience in this kind of planning, and
knowledge of facts must be based upon experience. At present, the
sociological knowledge necessary for large-scale engineering is
simply non-existent.
In view of this criticism, the Utopian engineer is likely to grant
the need for practical experience, and for a social technology based
upon practical experiences. But he will argue that we shall never
know more about these matters if we recoil from making social
experiments which alone can furnish us with the practical
experience needed. And he might add that Utopian engineering is
nothing but the application of the experimental method to society.

Experiments cannot be carried out without involving sweeping
changes. They must be on a large scale, owing to the peculiar
character of modern society with its great masses of people. An
experiment in socialism, for instance, if confined to a factory, or to
a village, or even to a district, would never give us the kind of
realistic information which we need so urgently.
Such arguments in favour of Utopian engineering exhibit a
prejudice which is as widely held as it is untenable, namely, the
prejudice that social experiments must be on a ‘large scale’, that
they must involve the whole of society if they are to be carried out
under realistic conditions. But piecemeal social experiments can be
carried out under realistic conditions, in the midst of society, in
spite of being on a ‘small scale’, that is to say, without
revolutionizing the whole of society. In fact, we are making such
experiments all the time. The introduction of a new kind of lifeinsurance, of a new kind of taxation, of a new penal reform, are all
social experiments which have their repercussions through the
whole of society without remodelling society as a whole. Even a
man who opens a new shop, or who reserves a ticket for the
theatre, is carrying out a kind of social experiment on a small
scale; and all our knowledge of social conditions is based on
experience gained by making experiments of this kind. The
Utopian engineer we are opposing is right when he stresses that an
experiment in socialism would be of little value if carried out
under laboratory conditions, for instance, in an isolated village,
since what we want to know is how things work out in society
under normal social conditions. But this very example shows
where the prejudice of the Utopian engineer lies. He is convinced
that we must recast the whole structure of society, when we
experiment with it; and he can therefore conceive a more modest
experiment only as one that recasts the whole structure of a small
society. But the kind of experiment from which we can learn most
is the alteration of one social institution at a time. For only in this
way can we learn how to fit institutions into the framework of
other institutions, and how to adjust them so that they work
according to our intentions. And only in this way can we make
mistakes, and learn from our mistakes, without risking
repercussions of a gravity that must endanger the will to future
reforms. Furthermore, the Utopian method must lead to a
dangerous dogmatic attachment to a blueprint for which countless
sacrifices have been made. Powerful interests must become linked

up with the success of the experiment. All this does not contribute
to the rationality, or to the scientific value, of the experiment. But
the piecemeal method permits repeated experiments and
continuous readjustments. In fact, it might lead to the happy
situation where politicians begin to look out for their own mistakes
instead of trying to explain them away and to prove that they have
always been right. This—and not Utopian planning or historical
prophecy—would mean the introduction of scientific method into
politics, since the whole secret of scientific method is a readiness
to learn from mistakes8.
These views can be corroborated, I believe, by comparing
social and, for instance, mechanical engineering. The Utopian
engineer will of course claim that mechanical engineers sometimes
plan even very complicated machinery as a whole, and that their
blueprints may cover, and plan in advance, not only a certain kind
of machinery, but even the whole factory which produces this
machinery. My reply would be that the mechanical engineer can do
all this because he has sufficient experience at his disposal, i.e.
theories developed by trial and error. But this means that he can
plan because he has made all kinds of mistakes already; or in other
words, because he relies on experience which he has gained by
applying piecemeal methods. His new machinery is the result of a
great many small improvements. He usually has a model first, and
only after a great number of piecemeal adjustments to its various
parts does he proceed to a stage where he could draw up his final
plans for the production. Similarly, his plan for the production of
his machine incorporates a great number of experiences, namely,
of piecemeal improvements made in older factories. The wholesale
or large-scale method works only where the piecemeal method has
furnished us first with a great number of detailed experiences, and
even then only within the realm of these experiences. Few
manufacturers would be prepared to proceed to the production of a
new engine on the basis of a blueprint alone, even if it were drawn
up by the greatest expert, without first making a model and
‘developing’ it by little adjustments as far as possible.
It is perhaps useful to contrast this criticism of Platonic
Idealism in politics with Marx’s criticism of what he calls
‘Utopianism’. What is common to Marx’s criticism and mine is
that both demand more realism. We both believe that Utopian
plans will never be realized in the way they were conceived,
because hardly any social action ever produces precisely the result

expected. (This does not, in my opinion, invalidate the piecemeal
approach, because here we may learn—or rather, we ought to
learn—and change our views, while we act.) But there are many
differences. In arguing against Utopianism, Marx condemns in fact
all social engineering—a point which is rarely understood. He
denounces the faith in a rational planning of social institutions as
altogether unrealistic, since society must grow according to the
laws of history and not according to our rational plans. All we can
do, he asserts, is to lessen the birth pangs of the historical
processes. In other words, he adopts a radically historicist attitude,
opposed to all social engineering. But there is one element within
Utopianism which is particularly characteristic of Plato’s approach
and which Marx does not oppose, although it is perhaps the most
important of those elements which I have attacked as unrealistic. It
is the sweep of Utopianism, its attempt to deal with society as a
whole, leaving no stone unturned. It is the conviction that one has
to go to the very root of the social evil, that nothing short of a
complete eradication of the offending social system will do if we
wish to ‘bring any decency into the world’ (as Du Gard says). It is,
in short, its uncompromising radicalism. (The reader will notice
that I am using this term in its original and literal sense—not in the
now customary sense of a ‘liberal progressivism’, but in order to
characterize an attitude of ‘going to the root of the matter’.) Both
Plato and Marx are dreaming of the apocalyptic revolution which
will radically transfigure the whole social world.
This sweep, this extreme radicalism of the Platonic approach
(and of the Marxian as well) is, I believe, connected with its
aestheticism, i.e. with the desire to build a world which is not only
a little better and more rational than ours, but which is free from all
its ugliness: not a crazy quilt, an old garment badly patched, but an
entirely new gown, a really beautiful new world9. This
aestheticism is a very understandable attitude; in fact, I believe
most of us suffer a little from such dreams of perfection. (Some
reasons why we do so will, I hope, emerge from the next chapter.)
But this aesthetic enthusiasm becomes valuable only if it is bridled
by reason, by a feeling of responsibility, and by a humanitarian
urge to help. Otherwise it is a dangerous enthusiasm, liable to
develop into a form of neurosis or hysteria.
Nowhere do we find this aestheticism more strongly expressed
than in Plato. Plato was an artist; and like many of the best artists,
he tried to visualize a model, the ‘divine original’ of his work, and

to ‘copy’ it faithfully. A good number of the quotations given in
the last chapter illustrate this point. What Plato describes as
dialectics is, in the main, the intellectual intuition of the world of
pure beauty. His trained philosophers are men who ‘have seen the
truth of what is beautiful and just, and good’10, and can bring it
down from heaven to earth. Politics, to Plato, is the Royal Art. It is
an art—not in a metaphorical sense in which we may speak about
the art of handling men, or the art of getting things done, but in a
more literal sense of the word. It is an art of composition, like
music, painting, or architecture. The Platonic politician composes
cities, for beauty’s sake.
But here I must protest. I do not believe that human lives may
be made the means for satisfying an artist’s desire for selfexpression. We must demand, rather, that every man should be
given, if he wishes, the right to model his life himself, as far as this
does not interfere too much with others. Much as I may sympathize
with the aesthetic impulse, I suggest that the artist might seek
expression in another material. Politics, I demand, must uphold
equalitarian and individualistic principles; dreams of beauty have
to submit to the necessity of helping men in distress, and men who
suffer injustice; and to the necessity of constructing institutions to
serve such purposes11.
It is interesting to observe the close relationship between
Plato’s utter radicalism, the demand for sweeping measures, and
his aestheticism. The following passages are most characteristic.
Plato, speaking about ‘the philosopher who has communion with
the divine’, mentions first that he will be ‘overwhelmed by the
urge .. to realize his heavenly vision in individuals as well as in the
city’,—a city which ‘will never know happiness unless its
draughtsmen are artists who have the divine as their model’. Asked
about the details of their draughtsmanship, Plato’s ‘Socrates’ gives
the following striking reply: ‘They will take as their canvas a city
and the characters of men, and they will, first of all, make their
canvas clean—by no means an easy matter. But this is just the
point, you know, where they will differ from all others. They will
not start work on a city nor on an individual (nor will they draw up
laws) unless they are given a clean canvas, or have cleaned it
themselves.’12
The kind of thing Plato has in mind when he speaks of canvascleaning is explained a little later. ‘How can that be done?’ asks
Glaucon. ‘All citizens above the age of ten’, Socrates answers,

‘must be expelled from the city and deported somewhere into the
country; and the children who are now free from the influence of
the manners and habits of their parents must be taken over. They
must be educated in the ways [of true philosophy], and according
to the laws, which we have described.’ (The philosophers are not,
of course, among the citizens to be expelled: they remain as
educators, and so do, presumably, those non-citizens who must
keep them going.) In the same spirit, Plato says in the Statesman of
the royal rulers who rule in accordance with the Royal Science of
Statesmanship: ‘Whether they happen to rule by law or without
law, over willing or unwilling subjects;... and whether they purge
the state for its good, by killing or by deporting [or ‘banishing’]
some of its citizens ...—so long as they proceed according to
science and justice, and preserve ... the state and make it better
than it was, this form of government must be declared the only one
that is right.’ This is the way in which the artist-politician must
proceed. This is what canvas-cleaning means. He must eradicate
the existing institutions and traditions. He must purify, purge,
expel, banish, and kill. (‘Liquidate’ is the terrible modern term for
it.) Plato’s statement is indeed a true description of the
uncompromising attitude of all forms of out-and-out radicalism—
of the aestheticist’s refusal to compromise. The view that society
should be beautiful like a work of art leads only too easily to
violent measures. But all this radicalism and violence is both
unrealistic and futile. (This has been shown by the example of
Russia’s development. After the economic breakdown to which the
canvas-cleaning of the so-called ‘war communism’ had led, Lenin
introduced his ‘New Economic Policy’, in fact a kind of piecemeal
engineering, though without the conscious formulation of its
principles or of a technology. He started by restoring most of the
features of the picture which had been eradicated with so much
human suffering. Money, markets, differentiation of income, and
private property—for a time even private enterprise in
production—were reintroduced, and only after this basis was reestablished began a new period of reform13.)
In order to criticize the foundations of Plato’s aesthetic
radicalism, we may distinguish two different points.
The first is this. What some people have in mind who speak of
our ‘social system’, and of the need to replace it by another
‘system’, is very similar to a picture painted on a canvas which has
to be wiped clean before one can paint a new one. But there are

some great differences. One of them is that the painter and those
who co-operate with him as well as the institutions which make
their life possible, his dreams and plans for a better world, and his
standards of decency and morality, are all part of the social system,
i.e. of the picture to be wiped out. If they were really to clean the
canvas, they would have to destroy themselves, and their Utopian
plans. (And what follows then would probably not be a beautiful
copy of a Platonic ideal but chaos.) The political artist clamours,
like Archimedes, for a place outside the social world on which he
can take his stand, in order to lever it off its hinges. But such a
place does not exist; and the social world must continue to function
during any reconstruction. This is the simple reason why we must
reform its institutions little by little, until we have more experience
in social engineering.
This leads us to the more important second point, to the
irrationalism which is inherent in radicalism. In all matters, we can
only learn by trial and error, by making mistakes and
improvements; we can never rely on inspiration, although
inspirations may be most valuable as long as they can be checked
by experience. Accordingly, it is not reasonable to assume that a
complete reconstruction of our social world would lead at once to
a workable system. Rather we should expect that, owing to lack of
experience, many mistakes would be made which could be
eliminated only by a long and laborious process of small
adjustments; in other words, by that rational method of piecemeal
engineering whose application we advocate. But those who dislike
this method as insufficiently radical would have again to wipe out
their freshly constructed society, in order to start anew with a clean
canvas; and since the new start, for the same reasons, would not
lead to perfection either, they would have to repeat this process
without ever getting anywhere. Those who admit this and are
prepared to adopt our more modest method of piecemeal
improvements, but only after the first radical canvas-cleaning, can
hardly escape the criticism that their first sweeping and violent
measures were quite unnecessary.
Aestheticism and radicalism must lead us to jettison reason,
and to replace it by a desperate hope for political miracles. This
irrational attitude which springs from an intoxication with dreams
of a beautiful world is what I call Romanticism14. It may seek its
heavenly city in the past or in the future; it may preach ‘back to
nature’ or ‘forward to a world of love and beauty’; but its appeal is

always to our emotions rather than to reason. Even with the best
intentions of making heaven on earth it only succeeds in making it
a hell—that hell which man alone prepares for his fellow-men.

The Background Of Plato’s Attack
Chapter 10: The Open Society And Its Enemies
He will restore us to our original nature, and heal us, and make
us happy and blessed.
—PLATO.

There is still something missing from our analysis. The
contention that Plato’s political programme is purely totalitarian,
and the objections to this contention which were raised in chapter
6, have led us to examine the part played, within this programme,
by such moral ideas as Justice, Wisdom, Truth, and Beauty. The
result of this examination was always the same. We found that the
role of these ideas is important, but that they do not lead Plato
beyond totalitarianism and racialism. But one of these ideas we
have still to examine: that of Happiness. It may be remembered
that we quoted Grossman in connection with the belief that Plato’s
political programme is fundamentally a ‘plan for the building of a
perfect state in which every citizen is really happy’, and that I
described this belief as a relic of the tendency to idealize Plato. If
called upon to justify my opinion, I should not have much
difficulty in pointing out that Plato’s treatment of happiness is
exactly analogous to his treatment of justice; and especially, that it
is based upon the same belief that society is ‘by nature’ divided
into classes or castes. True happiness1, Plato insists, is achieved
only by justice, i.e. by keeping one’s place. The ruler must find
happiness in ruling, the warrior in warring; and, we may infer, the
slave in slaving. Apart from that, Plato says frequently that what he
is aiming at is neither the happiness of individuals nor that of any
particular class in the state, but only the happiness of the whole,
and this, he argues, is nothing but the outcome of that rule of
justice which I have shown to be totalitarian in character. That only
this justice can lead to any true happiness is one of the main theses
of the Republic.
In view of all this, it seems to be a consistent and hardly
refutable interpretation of the material to present Plato as a
totalitarian party-politician, unsuccessful in his immediate and

practical undertakings, but in the long run only too successful2 in
his propaganda for the arrest and overthrow of a civilization which
he hated. But one only has to put the matter in this blunt fashion in
order to feel that there is something seriously amiss with this
interpretation. At any rate, so I felt, when I had formulated it. I felt
perhaps not so much that it was untrue, but that it was defective. I
therefore began to search for evidence which would refute this
interpretation3. However, in every point but one, this attempt to
refute my interpretation was quite unsuccessful. The new material
made the identity between Platonism and totalitarianism only the
more manifest.
The one point in which I felt that my search for a refutation had
succeeded concerned Plato’s hatred of tyranny. Of course, there
was always the possibility of explaining this away. It would have
been easy to say that his indictment of tyranny was mere
propaganda. Totalitarianism often professes a love for ‘true’
freedom, and Plato’s praise of freedom as opposed to tyranny
sounds exactly like this professed love. In spite of this, I felt that
certain of his observations on tyranny4, which will be mentioned
later in this chapter, were sincere. The fact, of course, that
‘tyranny’ usually meant in Plato’s day a form of rule based on the
support of the masses made it possible to claim that Plato’s hatred
of tyranny was consistent with my original interpretation. But I felt
that this did not remove the need for modifying my interpretation. I
also felt that the mere emphasis on Plato’s fundamental sincerity
was quite insufficient to accomplish this modification. No amount
of emphasis could offset the general impression of the picture. A
new picture was needed which would have to include Plato’s
sincere belief in his mission as healer of the sick social body, as
well as the fact that he had seen more clearly than anybody else
before or after him what was happening to Greek society. Since the
attempt to reject the identity of Platonism and totalitarianism had
not improved the picture, I was ultimately forced to modify my
interpretation of totalitarianism itself. In other words, my attempt
to understand Plato by analogy with modern totalitarianism led me,
to my own surprise, to modify my view of totalitarianism. It did
not modify my hostility, but it ultimately led me to see that the
strength of both the old and the new totalitarian movements rested
on the fact that they attempted to answer a very real need, however
badly conceived this attempt may have been.

In the light of my new interpretation, it appears to me that
Plato’s declaration of his wish to make the state and its citizens
happy is not merely propaganda. I am ready to grant his
fundamental benevolence5. I also grant that he was right, to a
limited extent, in the sociological analysis on which he based his
promise of happiness. To put this point more precisely: I believe
that Plato, with deep sociological insight, found that his
contemporaries were suffering under a severe strain, and that this
strain was due to the social revolution which had begun with the
rise of democracy and individualism. He succeeded in discovering
the main causes of their deeply rooted unhappiness—social
change, and social dissension—and he did his utmost to fight them.
There is no reason to doubt that one of his most powerful motives
was to win back happiness for the citizens. For reasons discussed
later in this chapter, I believe that the medico-political treatment
which he recommended, the arrest of change and the return to
tribalism, was hopelessly wrong. But the recommendation, though
not practicable as a therapy, testifies to Plato’s power of diagnosis.
It shows that he knew what was amiss, that he understood the
strain, the unhappiness, under which the people were labouring,
even though he erred in his fundamental claim that by leading
them back to tribalism he could lessen the strain, and restore their
happiness.
It is my intention to give in this chapter a very brief survey of
the historical material which induced me to hold such opinions. A
few critical remarks on the method adopted, that of historical
interpretation, will be found in the last chapter of the book. It will
therefore suffice here if I say that I do not claim scientific status
for this method, since the tests of an historical interpretation can
never be as rigorous as those of an ordinary hypothesis. The
interpretation is mainly a point of view, whose value lies in its
fertility, in its power to throw light upon the historical material, to
lead us to find new material, and to help us to rationalize and to
unify it. What I am going to say here is therefore not meant as a
dogmatic assertion, however boldly I may perhaps sometimes
express my opinions.
I
Our Western civilization originated with the Greeks. They
were, it seems, the first to make the step from tribalism to
humanitarianism. Let us consider what that means.

The early Greek tribal society resembles in many respects that
of peoples like the Polynesians, the Maoris for instance. Small
bands of warriors, usually living in fortified settlements, ruled by
tribal chiefs or kings, or by aristocratic families, were waging war
against one another on sea as well as on land. There were, of
course, many differences between the Greek and the Polynesian
ways of life, for there is, admittedly, no uniformity in tribalism.
There is no standardized ‘tribal way of life’. It seems to me,
however, that there are some characteristics that can be found in
most, if not all, of these tribal societies. I mean their magical or
irrational attitude towards the customs of social life, and the
corresponding rigidity of these customs.
The magical attitude towards social custom has been discussed
before. Its main element is the lack of distinction between the
customary or conventional regularities of social life and the
regularities found in ‘nature’; and this often goes together with the
belief that both are enforced by a supernatural will. The rigidity of
the social customs is probably in most cases only another aspect of
the same attitude. (There are some reasons to believe that this
aspect is even more primitive, and that the supernatural belief is a
kind of rationalization of the fear of changing a routine—a fear
which we can find in very young children.) When I speak of the
rigidity of tribalism I do not mean that no changes can occur in the
tribal ways of life. I mean rather that the comparatively infrequent
changes have the character of religious conversions or revulsions,
or of the introduction of new magical taboos. They are not based
upon a rational attempt to improve social conditions. Apart from
such changes—which are rare—taboos rigidly regulate and
dominate all aspects of life. They do not leave many loop-holes.
There are few problems in this form of life, and nothing really
equivalent to moral problems. I do not mean to say that a member
of a tribe does not sometimes need much heroism and endurance in
order to act in accordance with the taboos. What I mean is that he
will rarely find himself in the position of doubting how he ought to
act. The right way is always determined, though difficulties must
be overcome in following it. It is determined by taboos, by magical
tribal institutions which can never become objects of critical
consideration. Not even a Heraclitus distinguishes clearly between
the institutional laws of tribal life and the laws of nature; both are
taken to be of the same magical character. Based upon the
collective tribal tradition, the institutions leave no room for

personal responsibility. The taboos that establish some form of
group-responsibility may be the forerunner of what we call
personal responsibility, but they are fundamentally different from
it. They are not based upon a principle of reasonable
accountability, but rather upon magical ideas, such as the idea of
appeasing the powers of fate.
It is well known how much of this still survives. Our own ways
of life are still beset with taboos; food taboos, taboos of politeness,
and many others. And yet, there are some important differences. In
our own way of life there is, between the laws of the state on the
one hand and the taboos we habitually observe on the other, an
ever-widening field of personal decisions, with its problems and
responsibilities; and we know the importance of this field. Personal
decisions may lead to the alteration of taboos, and even of political
laws which are no longer taboos. The great difference is the
possibility of rational reflection upon these matters. Rational
reflection begins, in a way, with Heraclitus6. With Alcmaeon,
Phaleas and Hippodamus, with Herodotus and the Sophists, the
quest for the ‘best constitution’ assumes, by degrees, the character
of a problem which can be rationally discussed. And in our own
time, many of us make rational decisions concerning the
desirability or otherwise of new legislation, and of other
institutional changes; that is to say, decisions based upon an
estimate of possible consequences, and upon a conscious
preference for some of them. We recognize rational personal
responsibility.
In what follows, the magical or tribal or collectivist society will
also be called the closed society, and the society in which
individuals are confronted with personal decisions, the open
society.
A closed society at its best can be justly compared to an
organism. The so-called organic or biological theory of the state
can be applied to it to a considerable extent. A closed society
resembles a herd or a tribe in being a semi-organic unit whose
members are held together by semi-biological ties—kinship, living
together, sharing common efforts, common dangers, common joys
and common distress. It is still a concrete group of concrete
individuals, related to one another not merely by such abstract
social relationships as division of labour and exchange of
commodities, but by concrete physical relationships such as touch,
smell, and sight. And although such a society may be based on

slavery, the presence of slaves need not create a fundamentally
different problem from that of domesticated animals. Thus those
aspects are lacking which make it impossible to apply the organic
theory successfully to an open society.
The aspects I have in mind are connected with the fact that, in
an open society, many members strive to rise socially, and to take
the places of other members. This may lead, for example, to such
an important social phenomenon as class struggle. We cannot find
anything like class struggle in an organism. The cells or tissues of
an organism, which are sometimes said to correspond to the
members of a state, may perhaps compete for food; but there is no
inherent tendency on the part of the legs to become the brain, or of
other members of the body to become the belly. Since there is
nothing in the organism to correspond to one of the most important
characteristics of the open society, competition for status among its
members, the so-called organic theory of the state is based on a
false analogy. The closed society, on the other hand, does not
know much of such tendencies. Its institutions, including its castes,
are sacrosanct—taboo. The organic theory does not fit so badly
here. It is therefore not surprising to find that most attempts to
apply the organic theory to our society are veiled forms of
propaganda for a return to tribalism7.
As a consequence of its loss of organic character, an open
society may become, by degrees, what I should like to term an
‘abstract society’. It may, to a considerable extent, lose the
character of a concrete or real group of men, or of a system of such
real groups. This point which has been rarely understood may be
explained by way of an exaggeration. We could conceive of a
society in which men practically never meet face to face—in which
all business is conducted by individuals in isolation who
communicate by typed letters or by telegrams, and who go about in
closed motor-cars. (Artificial insemination would allow even
propagation without a personal element.) Such a fictitious society
might be called a ‘completely abstract or depersonalized society’.
Now the interesting point is that our modern society resembles in
many of its aspects such a completely abstract society. Although
we do not always drive alone in closed motor cars (but meet face
to face thousands of men walking past us in the street) the result is
very nearly the same as if we did—we do not establish as a rule
any personal relation with our fellow-pedestrians. Similarly,
membership of a trade union may mean no more than the

possession of a membership card and the payment of a contribution
to an unknown secretary. There are many people living in a
modern society who have no, or extremely few, intimate personal
contacts, who live in anonymity and isolation, and consequently in
unhappiness. For although society has become abstract, the
biological make-up of man has not changed much; men have social
needs which they cannot satisfy in an abstract society.
Of course, our picture is even in this form highly exaggerated.
There never will be or can be a completely abstract or even a
predominantly abstract society—no more than a completely
rational or even a predominantly rational society. Men still form
real groups and enter into real social contacts of all kinds, and try
to satisfy their emotional social needs as well as they can. But most
of the social groups of a modern open society (with the exception
of some lucky family groups) are poor substitutes, since they do
not provide for a common life. And many of them do not have any
function in the life of the society at large.
Another way in which the picture is exaggerated is that it does
not, so far, contain any of the gains made—only the losses. But
there are gains. Personal relationships of a new kind can arise
where they can be freely entered into, instead of being determined
by the accidents of birth; and with this, a new individualism arises.
Similarly, spiritual bonds can play a major role where the
biological or physical bonds are weakened; etc. However this may
be, our example, I hope, will have made plain what is meant by a
more abstract society in contradistinction to a more concrete or real
social group; and it will have made it clear that our modern open
societies function largely by way of abstract relations, such as
exchange or co-operation. (It is the analysis of these abstract
relations with which modern social theory, such as economic
theory, is mainly concerned. This point has not been understood by
many sociologists, such as Durkheim, who never gave up the
dogmatic belief that society must be analysed in terms of real
social groups.)
In the light of what has been said, it will be clear that the
transition from the closed to the open society can be described as
one of the deepest revolutions through which mankind has passed.
Owing to what we have described as the biological character of the
closed society, this transition must be felt deeply indeed. Thus
when we say that our Western civilization derives from the Greeks,
we ought to realize what it means. It means that the Greeks started

for us that great revolution which, it seems, is still in its
beginning—the transition from the closed to the open society.
II
Of course, this revolution was not made consciously. The
breakdown of tribalism, of the closed societies of Greece, may be
traced back to the time when population growth began to make
itself felt among the ruling class of landed proprietors. This meant
the end of ‘organic’ tribalism. For it created social tension within
the closed society of the ruling class. At first, there appeared to be
something like an ‘organic’ solution of this problem, the creation
of daughter cities. (The ‘organic’ character of this solution was
underlined by the magical procedures followed in the sending out
of colonists.) But this ritual of colonization only postponed the
breakdown. It even created new danger spots wherever it led to
cultural contacts; and these, in turn, created what was perhaps the
worst danger to the closed society—commerce, and a new class
engaged in trade and seafaring. By the sixth century B.C., this
development had led to the partial dissolution of the old ways of
life, and even to a series of political revolutions and reactions. And
it had led not only to attempts to retain and to arrest tribalism by
force, as in Sparta, but also to that great spiritual revolution, the
invention of critical discussion, and, in consequence, of thought
that was free from magical obsessions. At the same time we find
the first symptoms of a new uneasiness. The strain of civilization
was beginning to be felt.
This strain, this uneasiness, is a consequence of the breakdown
of the closed society. It is still felt even in our day, especially in
times of social change. It is the strain created by the effort which
life in an open and partially abstract society continually demands
from us—by the endeavour to be rational, to forgo at least some of
our emotional social needs, to look after ourselves, and to accept
responsibilities. We must, I believe, bear this strain as the price to
be paid for every increase in knowledge, in reasonableness, in cooperation and in mutual help, and consequently in our chances of
survival, and in the size of the population. It is the price we have to
pay for being human. The strain is most closely related to the
problem of the tension between the classes which is raised for the
first time by the breakdown of the closed society. The closed
society itself does not know this problem. At least to its ruling
members, slavery, caste, and class rule are ‘natural’ in the sense of

being unquestionable. But with the breakdown of the closed
society, this certainty disappears, and with it all feeling of security.
The tribal community (and later the ‘city’) is the place of security
for the member of the tribe. Surrounded by enemies and by
dangerous or even hostile magical forces, he experiences the tribal
community as a child experiences his family and his home, in
which he plays his definite part; a part he knows well, and plays
well. The breakdown of the closed society, raising as it does the
problems of class and other problems of social status, must have
had the same effect upon the citizens as a serious family quarrel
and the breaking up of the family home is liable to have on
children8. Of course, this kind of strain was felt by the privileged
classes, now that they were threatened, more strongly than by those
who had formerly been suppressed; but even the latter felt uneasy.
They also were frightened by the breakdown of their ‘natural’
world. And though they continued to fight their struggle, they were
often reluctant to exploit their victories over their class enemies
who were supported by tradition, the status quo, a higher level of
education, and a feeling of natural authority.
In this light we must try to understand the history of Sparta,
which successfully tried to arrest these developments, and of
Athens, the leading democracy.
Perhaps the most powerful cause of the breakdown of the
closed society was the development of sea-communications and
commerce. Close contact with other tribes is liable to undermine
the feeling of necessity with which tribal institutions are viewed;
and trade, commercial initiative, appears to be one of the few
forms in which individual initiative9 and independence can assert
itself, even in a society in which tribalism still prevails. These two,
seafaring and commerce, became the main characteristics of
Athenian imperialism, as it developed in the fifth century B.C. And
indeed they were recognized as the most dangerous developments
by the oligarchs, the members of the privileged, or of the formerly
privileged, classes of Athens. It became clear to them that the trade
of Athens, its monetary commercialism, its naval policy, and its
democratic tendencies were parts of one single movement, and that
it was impossible to defeat democracy without going to the roots of
the evil and destroying both the naval policy and the empire. But
the naval policy of Athens was based upon its harbours, especially
the Piraeus, the centre of commerce and the stronghold of the
democratic party; and strategically, upon the walls which fortified

Athens, and later, upon the Long Walls which linked it to the
harbours of the Piraeus and Phalerum. Accordingly, we find that
for more than a century the empire, the fleet, the harbour, and the
walls were hated by the oligarchic parties of Athens as the symbols
of the democracy and as the sources of its strength which they
hoped one day to destroy.
Much evidence of this development can be found in
Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War, or rather, of the
two great wars of 431-421 and 419-403 B.C., between Athenian
democracy and the arrested oligarchic tribalism of Sparta. When
reading Thucydides we must never forget that his heart was not
with Athens, his native city. Although he apparently did not belong
to the extreme wing of the Athenian oligarchic clubs who
conspired throughout the war with the enemy, he was certainly a
member of the oligarchic party, and a friend neither of the
Athenian people, the demos, who had exiled him, nor of its
imperialist policy. (I do not intend to belittle Thucydides, the
greatest historian, perhaps, who ever lived. But however successful
he was in making sure of the facts he records, and however sincere
his efforts to be impartial, his comments and moral judgements
represent an interpretation, a point of view; and in this we need not
agree with him.) I quote first from a passage describing
Themistocles’ policy in 482 B.C., half a century before the
Peloponnesian war: ‘Themistocles also persuaded the Athenians to
finish the Piraeus ... Since the Athenians had now taken to the sea,
he thought that they had a great opportunity for building an empire.
He was the first who dared to say that they should make the sea
their domain ...’10 Twenty-five years later, ‘the Athenians began to
build their Long Walls to the sea, one to the harbour of Phalerum,
the other to the Piraeus’11. But this time, twenty-six years before
the outbreak of the Peloponnesian war, the oligarchic party was
fully aware of the meaning of these developments. We hear from
Thucydides that they did not shrink even from the most blatant
treachery. As sometimes happens with oligarchs, class interest
superseded their patriotism. An opportunity offered itself in the
form of a hostile Spartan expeditionary force operating in the north
of Athens, and they determined to conspire with Sparta against
their own country. Thucydides writes: ‘Certain Athenians were
privately making overtures to them’ (i.e. to the Spartans) ‘in the
hope that they would put an end to the democracy, and to the
building of the Long Walls. But the other Athenians .. suspected

their design against democracy.’ The loyal Athenian citizens
therefore went out to meet the Spartans, but were defeated. It
appears, however, that they had weakened the enemy sufficiently
to prevent him from joining forces with the fifth columnists within
their own city. Some months later, the Long Walls were
completed, which meant that the democracy could enjoy security
as long as it upheld its naval supremacy.
This incident throws light on the tenseness of the class situation
in Athens, even twenty-six years before the outbreak of the
Peloponnesian war, during which the situation became much
worse. It also throws light on the methods employed by the
subversive and pro-Spartan oligarchic party. Thucydides, one must
note, mentions their treachery only in passing, and he does not
censure them, although in other places he speaks most strongly
against class struggle and party spirit. The next passages quoted,
written as a general reflection on the Corcyraean Revolution of 427
B.C., are interesting, first as an excellent picture of the class
situation; secondly, as an illustration of the strong words
Thucydides could find when he wanted to describe analogous
tendencies on the side of the democrats of Corcyra. (In order to
judge his lack of impartiality we must remember that in the
beginning of the war Corcyra had been one of Athens’ democratic
allies, and that the revolt had been started by the oligarchs.)
Moreover, the passage is an excellent expression of the feeling of a
general social breakdown: ‘Nearly the whole Hellenic world’,
writes Thucydides, ‘was in commotion. In every city, the leaders
of the democratic and of the oligarchic parties were trying hard, the
one to bring in the Athenians, the other the Lacedaemonians ... The
tie of party was stronger than the tie of blood ... The leaders on
either side used specious names, the one party professing to uphold
the constitutional equality of the many, the other the wisdom of the
nobility; in reality they made the public interest their price,
professing, of course, their devotion to it. They used any
conceivable means for getting the better of one another, and
committed the most monstrous crimes ... This revolution gave birth
to every form of wickedness in Hellas ... Everywhere prevailed an
attitude of perfidious antagonism. There was no word binding
enough, no oath terrible enough, to reconcile enemies. Each man
was strong only in the conviction that nothing was secure.’12
The full significance of the attempt of the Athenian oligarchs to
accept the help of Sparta and stop the building of the Long Walls

can be gauged when we realize that this treacherous attitude had
not changed when Aristotle wrote his Politics, more than a century
later. We hear there about an oligarchic oath, which, Aristotle said,
‘is now in vogue’. This is how it runs: ‘I promise to be an enemy
of the people, and to do my best to give them bad advice!’13 It is
clear that we cannot understand the period without remembering
this attitude.
I mentioned above that Thucydides himself was an antidemocrat. This becomes clear when we consider his description of
the Athenian empire, and the way it was hated by the various
Greek states. Athens’ rule over its empire, he tells us, was felt to be
no better than a tyranny, and all the Greek tribes were afraid of her.
In describing public opinion at the outbreak of the Peloponnesian
war, he is mildly critical of Sparta and very critical of Athenian
imperialism. ‘The general feeling of the peoples was strongly on
the side of the Lacedaemonians; for they maintained that they were
the liberators of Hellas. Cities and individuals were eager to assist
them .., and the general indignation against the Athenians was
intense. Some were longing to be liberated from Athens, others
fearful of falling under its sway.’14 It is most interesting that this
judgement of the Athenian empire has become, more or less, the
official judgement of ‘History’, i.e. of most of the historians. Just
as the philosophers find it hard to free themselves from Plato’s
point of view, so are the historians bound to that of Thucydides. As
an example I may quote Meyer (the best German authority on this
period), who simply repeats Thucydides when he says: ‘The
sympathies of the educated world of Greece were .. turned away
from Athens.’15
But such statements are only expressions of the anti-democratic
point of view. Many facts recorded by Thucydides—for instance,
the passage quoted which describes the attitude of the democratic
and oligarchic party leaders—show that Sparta was ‘popular’ not
among the peoples of Greece but only among the oligarchs; among
the ‘educated’, as Meyer puts it so nicely. Even Meyer admits that
‘the democratically minded masses hoped in, many places for her
victory’16, i.e. for the victory of Athens; and Thucydides’ narrative
contains many instances which prove Athens’ popularity among
the democrats and the suppressed. But who cares for the opinion of
the uneducated masses? If Thucydides and the ‘educated’ assert
that Athens was a tyrant, then she was a tyrant.

It is most interesting that the same historians who hail Rome
for her achievement, the foundation of a universal empire,
condemn Athens for her attempt to achieve something better. The
fact that Rome succeeded where Athens failed is not a sufficient
explanation of this attitude. They do not really censure Athens for
her failure, since they loathe the very idea that her attempt might
have been successful. Athens, they believe, was a ruthless
democracy, a place ruled by the uneducated, who hated and
suppressed the educated, and were hated by them in turn. But this
view—the myth of the cultural intolerance of democratic Athens—
makes nonsense of the known facts, and above all of the
astonishing spiritual productivity of Athens in this particular
period. Even Meyer must admit this productivity. ‘What Athens
produced in this decade’, he says with characteristic modesty,
‘ranks equal with one of the mightiest decades of German
literature.’17 Pericles, who was the democratic leader of Athens at
this time, was more than justified when he called her ‘The School
of Hellas’.
I am far from defending everything that Athens did in building
up her empire, and I certainly do not wish to defend wanton attacks
(if such have occurred), or acts of brutality; nor do I forget that
Athenian democracy was still based on slavery18. But it is
necessary, I believe, to see that tribalist exclusiveness and selfsufficiency could be superseded only by some form of imperialism.
And it must be said that certain of the imperialist measures
introduced by Athens were rather liberal. One very interesting
instance is the fact that Athens offered, in 405 B.C., to her ally, the
Ionian island Samos, ‘that the Samians should be Athenians from
now on; and that both cities should be one state; and that the
Samians should order their internal affairs as they chose, and retain
their laws.’19 Another instance is Athens’ method of taxing her
empire. Much has been said about these taxes, or tributes, which
have been described—very unjustly, I believe—as a shameless and
tyrannical way of exploiting the smaller cities. In an attempt to
evaluate the significance of these taxes, we must, of course,
compare them with the volume of the trade which, in return, was
protected by the Athenian fleet. The necessary information is given
by Thucydides, from whom we learn that the Athenians imposed
upon their allies, in 413 B.C., ‘in place of the tribute, a duty of 5
per cent, on all things imported and exported by sea; and they
thought that this would yield more’20. This measure, adopted under

severe strain of war, compares favourably, I believe, with the
Roman methods of centralization. The Athenians, by this method
of taxation, became interested in the development of allied trade,
and so in the initiative and independence of the various members
of their empire. Originally, the Athenian empire had developed out
of a league of equals. In spite of the temporary predominance of
Athens, publicly criticized by some of her citizens (cp.
Aristophanes’ Lysistrata), it seems probable that her interest in the
development of trade would have led, in time, to some kind of
federal constitution. At least, we know in her case of nothing like
the Roman method of ‘transferring’ the cultural possessions from
the empire to the dominant city, i.e. of looting. And whatever one
might say against plutocracy, it is preferable to a rule of looters21.
This favourable view of Athenian imperialism can be
supported by comparing it with the Spartan methods of handling
foreign affairs. They were determined by the ultimate aim that
dominated Sparta’s policy, by its attempt to arrest all change and to
return to tribalism. (This is impossible, as I shall contend later on.
Innocence once lost cannot be regained, and an artificially arrested
closed society, or a cultivated tribalism, cannot equal the genuine
article.) The principles of Spartan policy were these, (1) Protection
of its arrested tribalism: shut out all foreign influences which might
endanger the rigidity of tribal taboos.—(2) Anti-humanitarianism:
shut out, more especially, all equalitarian, democratic, and
individualistic ideologies.—(3) Autarky: be independent of
trade.—(4) Anti-universalism or particularism: uphold the
differentiation between your tribe and all others; do not mix with
inferiors.—(5) Mastery: dominate and enslave your neighbours.—
(6) But do not become too large: ‘The city should grow only as
long as it can do so without impairing its unity’22, and especially,
without risking the introduction of universalistic tendencies.—If
we compare these six principal tendencies with those of modern
totalitarianism, then we see that they agree fundamentally, with the
sole exception of the last. The difference can be described by
saying that modern totalitarianism appears to have imperialist
tendencies. But this imperialism has no element of a tolerant
universalism, and the world-wide ambitions of the modern
totalitarians are imposed upon them, as it were, against their will.
Two factors are responsible for this. The first is the general
tendency of all tyrannies to justify their existence by saving the
state (or the people) from its enemies—a tendency which must

lead, whenever the old enemies have been successfully subdued, to
the creation or invention of new ones. The second factor is the
attempt to carry into effect the closely related points (2) and (5) of
the totalitarian programme. Humanitarianism, which, according to
point (2), must be kept out, has become so universal that, in order
to combat it effectively at home, it must be destroyed all over the
world. But our world has become so small that everybody is now a
neighbour, so that, to carry out point (5), everybody must be
dominated and enslaved. But in ancient times, nothing could have
appeared more dangerous to those who adopted a particularism
like Sparta’s, than Athenian imperialism, with its inherent
tendency to develop into a commonwealth of Greek cities, and
perhaps even into a universal empire of man.
Summing up our analysis so far, we can say that the political
and spiritual revolution which had begun with the breakdown of
Greek tribalism reached its climax in the fifth century, with the
outbreak of the Peloponnesian war. It had developed into a violent
class war, and, at the same time, into a war between the two
leading cities of Greece.
III
But how can we explain the fact that outstanding Athenians
like Thucydides stood on the side of reaction against these new
developments? Class interest is, I believe, an insufficient
explanation; for what we have to explain is the fact that, while
many of the ambitious young nobles became active, although not
always reliable, members of the democratic party, some of the
most thoughtful and gifted resisted its attraction. The main point
seems to be that although the open society was already in
existence, although it had, in practice, begun to develop new
values, new equalitarian standards of life, there was still something
missing, especially for the ‘educated’. The new faith of the open
society, its only possible faith, humanitarianism, was beginning to
assert itself, but was not yet formulated. For the time being, one
could not see much more than class war, the democrats’ fear of the
oligarchic reaction, and the threat of further revolutionary
developments. The reaction against these developments had
therefore much on its side—tradition, the call for defending old
virtues, and the old religion. These tendencies appealed to the
feelings of most men, and their popularity gave rise to a movement
to which, although it was led and used for their own ends by the

Spartans and their oligarchic friends, many upright men must have
belonged, even at Athens. From the slogan of the movement,
‘Back to the state of our forefathers’, or ‘Back to the old paternal
state’, derives the term ‘patriot’. It is hardly necessary to insist that
the beliefs popular among those who supported this ‘patriotic’
movement were grossly perverted by those oligarchs who did not
shrink from handing over their own city to the enemy, in the hope
of gaining support against the democrats. Thucydides was one of
the representative leaders of this movement for the ‘paternal
state’23, and though he probably did not support the treacherous
acts of the extreme anti-democrats, he could not disguise his
sympathies with their fundamental aim—to arrest social change,
and to fight the universalistic imperialism of the Athenian
democracy and the instruments and symbols of its power, the navy,
the walls, and commerce. (In view of Plato’s doctrines concerning
commerce, it may be interesting to note how great the fear of
commercialism was. When after his victory over Athens in 404
B.C. the Spartan king, Lysander, returned with great booty, the
Spartan ‘patriots’, i.e. the members of the movement for the
‘paternal state’, tried to prevent the import of gold; and though it
was ultimately admitted, its possession was limited to the state, and
capital punishment was imposed on any citizen found in
possession of precious metals. In Plato’s Laws, very similar
procedures are advocated24).
Although the ‘patriotic’ movement was partly the expression of
the longing to return to more stable forms of life, to religion,
decency, law and order, it was itself morally rotten. Its ancient
faith was lost, and was largely replaced by a hypocritical and even
cynical exploitation of religious sentiments.25 Nihilism, as painted
by Plato in the portraits of Callicles and Thrasymachus, could be
found if anywhere among the young ‘patriotic’ aristocrats who, if
given the opportunity, became leaders of the democratic party. The
clearest exponent of this nihilism was perhaps the oligarchic leader
who helped to deal the death-blow at Athens, Plato’s uncle Critias,
the leader of the Thirty Tyrants.26
But at this time, in the same generation to which Thucydides
belonged, there rose a new faith in reason, freedom and the
brotherhood of all men—the new faith, and, as I believe, the only
possible faith, of the open society.

IV
This generation which marks a turning point in the history of
mankind, I should like to call the Great Generation; it is the
generation which lived in Athens just before, and during, the
Peloponnesian war.27 There were great conservatives among them,
like Sophocles, or Thucydides. There were men among them who
represent the period of transition; who were wavering, like
Euripides, or sceptical, like Aristophanes. But there was also the
great leader of democracy, Pericles, who formulated the principle
of equality before the law and of political individualism, and
Herodotus, who was welcomed and hailed in Pericles’ city as the
author of a work that glorified these principles. Protagoras, a native
of Abdera who became influential in Athens, and his countryman
Democritus must also be counted among the Great Generation.
They formulated the doctrine that human institutions of language,
custom, and law are not of the magical character of taboos but
man-made, not natural but conventional, insisting, at the same
time, that we are responsible for them. Then there was the school
of Gorgias—Alcidamas, Lycophron and Antisthenes, who
developed the fundamental tenets of anti-slavery, of a rational
protectionism, and of anti-nationalism, i.e. the creed of the
universal empire of men. And there was, perhaps the greatest of
all, Socrates, who taught the lesson that we must have faith in
human reason, but at the same time beware of dogmatism; that we
must keep away both from misology28, the distrust of theory and of
reason, and from the magical attitude of those who make an idol of
wisdom; who taught, in other words, that the spirit of science is
criticism.
Since I have not so far said much about Pericles, and nothing at
all about Democritus, I may use some of their own words in order
to illustrate the new faith. First Democritus: ‘Not out of fear but
out of a feeling of what is right should we abstain from doing
wrong ... Virtue is based, most of all, upon respecting the other
man ... Every man is a little world of his own ... We ought to do
our utmost to help those who have suffered injustice ... To be good
means to do no wrong; and also, not to want to do wrong ... It is
good deeds, not words, that count ... The poverty of a democracy is
better than the prosperity which allegedly goes with aristocracy or
monarchy, just as liberty is better than slavery ... The wise man
belongs to all countries, for the home of a great soul is the whole
world.’

To him is due also that remark of a true scientist: ‘I would
rather find a single causal law than be the king of Persia!’29 In their
humanitarian and universalistic emphasis some of these fragments
of Democritus sound, although they are of earlier date, as if they
were directed against Plato. The same impression is conveyed,
only much more strongly, by Pericles’ famous funeral oration,
delivered at least half a century before the Republic was written. I
have quoted two sentences from this oration in chapter 6, when
discussing equalitarianism30, but a few passages may be quoted
here more fully in order to give a clearer impression of its spirit.
‘Our political system does not compete with institutions which are
elsewhere in force. We do not copy our neighbours, but try to be
an example. Our administration favours the many instead of the
few: this is why it is called a democracy. The laws afford equal
justice to all alike in their private disputes, but we do not ignore the
claims of excellence. When a citizen distinguishes himself, then he
will be called to serve the state, in preference to others, not as a
matter of privilege, but as a reward of merit; and poverty is no bar
... The freedom we enjoy extends also to ordinary life; we are not
suspicious of one another, and do not nag our neighbour if he
chooses to go his own way ... But this freedom does not make us
lawless. We are taught to respect the magistrates and the laws, and
never to forget that we must protect the injured. And we are also
taught to observe those unwritten laws whose sanction lies only in
the universal feeling of what is right ...
‘Our city is thrown open to the world; we never expel a
foreigner ... We are free to live exactly as we please, and yet we
are always ready to face any danger ... We love beauty without
indulging in fancies, and although we try to improve our intellect,
this does not weaken our will ... To admit one’s poverty is no
disgrace with us; but we consider it disgraceful not to make an
effort to avoid it. An Athenian citizen does not neglect public
affairs when attending to his private business ... We consider a man
who takes no interest in the state not as harmless, but as useless;
and although only a few may originate a policy, we are all able to
judge it. We do not look upon discussion as a stumbling-block in
the way of political action, but as an indispensable preliminary to
acting wisely ... We believe that happiness is the fruit of freedom
and freedom that of valour, and we do not shrink from the dangers
of war ... To sum up, I claim that Athens is the School of Hellas,

and that the individual Athenian grows up to develop a happy
versatility, a readiness for emergencies, and self-reliance.’31
These words are not merely an eulogy on Athens; they express
the true spirit of the Great Generation. They formulate the political
programme of a great equalitarian individualist, of a democrat who
well understands that democracy cannot be exhausted by the
meaningless principle that ‘the people should rule’, but that it must
be based on faith in reason, and on humanitarianism. At the same
time, they are an expression of true patriotism, of just pride in a
city which had made it its task to set an example; which became
the school, not only of Hellas, but, as we know, of mankind, for
millennia past and yet to come.
Pericles’ speech is not only a programme. It is also a defence,
and perhaps even an attack. It reads, as I have already hinted, like a
direct attack on Plato. I do not doubt that it was directed, not only
against the arrested tribalism of Sparta, but also against the
totalitarian ring or ‘link’ at home; against the movement for the
paternal state, the Athenian ‘Society of the Friends of Laconia’ (as
Th. Gomperz called them in 190232). The speech is the earliest33
and at the same time perhaps the strongest statement ever made in
opposition to this kind of movement. Its importance was felt by
Plato, who caricatured Pericles’ oration half a century later in the
passages of the Republic34 in which he attacks democracy, as well
as in that undisguised parody, the dialogue called Menexenus or
the Funeral Oration35. But the friends of Laconia whom Pericles
attacked retaliated long before Plato. Only five or six years after
Pericles’ oration, a pamphlet on the Constitution of Athens36 was
published by an unknown author (possibly Critias), now usually
called the ‘Old Oligarch’. This ingenious pamphlet, the oldest
extant treatise on political theory, is, at the same time, perhaps the
oldest monument of the desertion of mankind by its intellectual
leaders. It is a ruthless attack upon Athens, written no doubt by one
of her best brains. Its central idea, an idea which became an article
of faith with Thucydides and Plato, is the close connection
between naval imperialism and democracy. And it tries to show
that there can be no compromise in a conflict between two
worlds37, the worlds of democracy and of oligarchy; that only the
use of ruthless violence, of total measures, including the
intervention of allies from outside (the Spartans), can put an end to
the unholy rule of freedom. This remarkable pamphlet was to
become the first of a practically infinite sequence of works on

political philosophy which were to repeat more or less, openly or
covertly, the same theme down to our own day. Unwilling and
unable to help mankind along their difficult path into an unknown
future which they have to create for themselves, some of the
‘educated’ tried to make them turn back into the past. Incapable of
leading a new way, they could only make themselves leaders of the
perennial revolt against freedom. It became the more necessary for
them to assert their superiority by fighting against equality as they
were (using Socratic language) misanthropists and misologists—
incapable of that simple and ordinary generosity which inspires
faith in men, and faith in human reason and freedom. Harsh as this
judgement may sound, it is just, I fear, if it is applied to those
intellectual leaders of the revolt against freedom who came after
the Great Generation, and especially after Socrates. We can now
try to see them against the background of our historical
interpretation.
The rise of philosophy itself can be interpreted, I think, as a
response to the breakdown of the closed society and its magical
beliefs. It is an attempt to replace the lost magical faith by a
rational faith; it modifies the tradition of passing on a theory or a
myth by founding a new tradition—the tradition of challenging
theories and myths and of critically discussing them38. (A
significant point is that this attempt coincides with the spread of
the so-called Orphic sects whose members tried to replace the lost
feeling of unity by a new mystical religion.) The earliest
philosophers, the three great Ionians and Pythagoras, were
probably quite unaware of the stimulus to which they were
reacting. They were the representatives as well as the unconscious
antagonists of a social revolution. The very fact that they founded
schools or sects or orders, i.e. new social institutions or rather
concrete groups with a common life and common functions, and
modelled largely after those of an idealized tribe, proves that they
were reformers in the social field, and therefore, that they were
reacting to certain social needs. That they reacted to these needs
and to their own sense of drift, not by imitating Hesiod in
inventing a historicist myth of destiny and decay39, but by
inventing the tradition of criticism and discussion, and with it the
art of thinking rationally, is one of the inexplicable facts which
stand at the beginning of our civilization. But even these
rationalists reacted to the loss of the unity of tribalism in a largely
emotional way. Their reasoning gives expression to their feeling of

drift, to the strain of a development which was about to create our
individualistic civilization. One of the oldest expressions of this
strain goes back to Anaximander40, the second of the Ionian
philosophers. Individual existence appeared to him as hubris, as an
impious act of injustice, as a wrongful act of usurpation, for which
individuals must suffer, and do penance. The first to become
conscious of the social revolution and the struggle of classes was
Heraclitus. How he rationalized his feeling of drift by developing
the first anti-democratic ideology and the first historicist
philosophy of change and destiny, has been described in the
second chapter of this book. Heraclitus was the first conscious
enemy of the open society.
Nearly all these early thinkers were labouring under a tragic
and desperate strain41. The only exception is perhaps the
monotheist Xenophanes42, who carried his burden courageously.
We cannot blame them for their hostility towards the new
developments in the way in which we may, to some extent, blame
their successors. The new faith of the open society, the faith in
man, in equalitarian justice, and in human reason, was perhaps
beginning to take shape, but it was not yet formulated.
V
The greatest contribution to this faith was to be made by
Socrates, who died for it. Socrates was not a leader of Athenian
democracy, like Pericles, or a theorist of the open society, like
Protagoras. He was, rather, a critic of Athens and of her democratic
institutions, and in this he may have borne a superficial
resemblance to some of the leaders of the reaction against the open
society. But there is no need for a man who criticizes democracy
and democratic institutions to be their enemy, although both the
democrats he criticizes, and the totalitarians who hope to profit
from any disunion in the democratic camp, are likely to brand him
as such. There is a fundamental difference between a democratic
and a totalitarian criticism of democracy. Socrates’ criticism was a
democratic one, and indeed of the kind that is the very life of
democracy. (Democrats who do not see the difference between a
friendly and a hostile criticism of democracy are themselves
imbued with the totalitarian spirit. Totalitarianism, of course,
cannot consider any criticism as friendly, since every criticism of
such an authority must challenge the principle of authority itself.)

I have already mentioned some aspects of Socrates’ teaching:
his intellectualism, i.e. his equalitarian theory of human reason as a
universal medium of communication; his stress on intellectual
honesty and self-criticism; his equalitarian theory of justice, and
his doctrine that it is better to be a victim of injustice than to inflict
it upon others. I think it is this last doctrine which can help us best
to understand the core of his teaching, his creed of individualism,
his belief in the human individual as an end in himself.
The closed society, and with it its creed that the tribe is
everything and the individual nothing, had broken down.
Individual initiative and self-assertion had become a fact. Interest
in the human individual as individual, and not only as tribal hero
and saviour, had been aroused43. But a philosophy which makes
man the centre of its interest began only with Protagoras. And the
belief that there is nothing more important in our life than other
individual men, the appeal to men to respect one another and
themselves, appears to be due to Socrates.
Burnet has stressed44 that it was Socrates who created the
conception of the soul, a conception which had such an immense
influence upon our civilization. I believe that there is much in this
view, although I feel that its formulation may be misleading,
especially the use of the term ‘soul’; for Socrates seems to have
kept away from metaphysical theories as much as he could. His
appeal was a moral appeal, and his theory of individuality (or of
the ‘soul’, if this word is preferred) is, I think, a moral and not a
metaphysical doctrine. He was fighting, with the help of this
doctrine, as always, against self-satisfaction and complacency. He
demanded that individualism should not be merely the dissolution
of tribalism, but that the individual should prove worthy of his
liberation. This is why he insisted that man is not merely a piece of
flesh—a body. There is more in man, a divine spark, reason; and a
love of truth, of kindness, humaneness, a love of beauty and of
goodness. It is these that make a man’s life worth while. But if I
am not merely a ‘body’, what am I, then? You are, first of all,
intelligence, was Socrates’ reply. It is your reason that makes you
human; that enables you to be more than a mere bundle of desires
and wishes; that makes you a self-sufficient individual and entitles
you to claim that you are an end in yourself. Socrates’ saying ‘care
for your souls’ is largely an appeal for intellectual honesty, just as
the saying ‘know thyself is used by him to remind us of our
intellectual limitations.

These, Socrates insisted, are the things that matter. And what
he criticized in democracy and democratic statesmen was their
inadequate realization of these things. He criticized them rightly
for their lack of intellectual honesty, and for their obsession with
power-politics45. With his emphasis upon the human side of the
political problem, he could not take much interest in institutional
reform. It was the immediate, the personal aspect of the open
society in which he was interested. He was mistaken when he
considered himself a politician; he was a teacher.
But if Socrates was, fundamentally, the champion of the open
society, and a friend of democracy, why, it may be asked, did he
mix with anti-democrats? For we know that among his companions
were not only Alcibiades, who for a time went over to the side of
Sparta, but also two of Plato’s uncles, Critias who later became the
ruthless leader of the Thirty Tyrants, and Charmides who became
his lieutenant.
There is more than one reply to this question. First we are told
by Plato that Socrates’ attack upon the democratic politicians of his
time was carried out partly with the purpose of exposing the
selfishness and lust for power of the hypocritical flatterers of the
people, more particularly, of the young aristocrats who posed as
democrats, but who looked upon the people as mere instruments of
their lust for power46. This activity made him, on the one hand,
attractive to some at least of the enemies of democracy; on the
other hand it brought him into contact with ambitious aristocrats of
that very type. And here enters a second consideration. Socrates,
the moralist and individualist, would never merely attack these
men. He would, rather, take a real interest in them, and he would
hardly give them up without making a serious attempt to convert
them. There are many allusions to such attempts in Plato’s
dialogues. We have reason, and this is a third consideration, to
believe that Socrates, the teacher-politician, even went out of his
way to attract young men and to gain influence over them,
especially when he considered them open to conversion, and
thought that some day they might possibly hold offices of
responsibility in their city. The outstanding example is, of course,
Alcibiades, singled out from his very childhood as the great future
leader of the Athenian empire. And Critias’ brilliancy, ambition
and courage made him one of the few likely competitors of
Alcibiades. (He co-operated with Alcibiades for a time, but later
turned against him. It is not at all improbable that the temporary

co-operation was due to Socrates’ influence.) From all we know
about Plato’s own early and later political aspirations, it is more
than likely that his relations with Socrates were of a similar kind47.
Socrates, though one of the leading spirits of the open society, was
not a party man. He would have worked in any circle where his
work might have benefited his city. If he took interest in a
promising youth he was not to be deterred by oligarchic family
connections. But these connections were to cause his death. When
the great war was lost, Socrates was accused of having educated
the men who had betrayed democracy and conspired with the
enemy to bring about the downfall of Athens.
The history of the Peloponnesian war and the fall of Athens is
still often told, under the influence of Thucydides’ authority, in
such a way that the defeat of Athens appears as the ultimate proof
of the moral weaknesses of the democratic system. But this view is
merely a tendentious distortion, and the well-known facts tell a
very different story. The main responsibility for the lost war rests
with the treacherous oligarchs who continuously conspired with
Sparta. Prominent among these were three former disciples of
Socrates, Alcibiades, Critias, and Charmides. After the fall of
Athens in 404 B.C. the two latter became the leaders of the Thirty
Tyrants, who were no more than a puppet government under
Spartan protection. The fall of Athens, and the destruction of the
walls, are often presented as the final results of the great war which
had started in 431 B.C. But in this presentation lies a major
distortion; for the democrats fought on. At first only seventy
strong, they prepared under the leadership of Thrasybulus and
Anytus the liberation of Athens, where Critias was meanwhile
killing scores of citizens; during the eight months of his reign of
terror the death-roll contained ‘rather a greater number of
Athenians than the Peloponnesians had killed during the last ten
years of war’48. But after eight months (in 403 B.C.) Critias and
the Spartan garrison were attacked and defeated by the democrats,
who established themselves in the Piraeus, and both of Plato’s
uncles lost their lives in the battle. Their oligarchic followers
continued for a time the reign of terror in the city of Athens itself,
but their forces were in a state of confusion and dissolution.
Having proved themselves incapable of ruling, they were
ultimately abandoned by their Spartan protectors, who concluded a
treaty with the democrats. The peace re-established democracy in
Athens. Thus the democratic form of government had proved its

superior strength under the most severe trials, and even its enemies
began to think it invincible. (Nine years later, after the battle of
Cnidus, the Athenians could re-erect their walls. The defeat of
democracy had turned into victory.)
As soon as the restored democracy had re-established normal
legal conditions49, a case was brought against Socrates. Its
meaning was clear enough; he was accused of having had his hand
in the education of the most pernicious enemies of the state,
Alcibiades, Critias, and Charmides. Certain difficulties for the
prosecution were created by an amnesty for all political crimes
committed before the re-establishment of the democracy. The
charge could not therefore openly refer to these notorious cases.
And the prosecutors probably sought not so much to punish
Socrates for the unfortunate political events of the past which, as
they knew well, had happened against his intentions; their aim was,
rather, to prevent him from continuing his teaching, which, in view
of its effects, they could hardly regard otherwise than as dangerous
to the state. For all these reasons, the charge was given the vague
and rather meaningless form that Socrates was corrupting the
youth, that he was impious, and that he had attempted to introduce
novel religious practices into the state. (The latter two charges
undoubtedly expressed, however clumsily, the correct feeling that
in the ethico-religious field he was a revolutionary.) Because of the
amnesty, the ‘corrupted youth’ could not be more precisely named,
but everybody knew, of course, who was meant50. In his defence,
Socrates insisted that he had no sympathy with the policy of the
Thirty, and that he had actually risked his life by defying their
attempt to implicate him in one of their crimes. And he reminded
the jury that among his closest associates and most enthusiastic
disciples there was at least one ardent democrat, Chaerephon, who
fought against the Thirty (and who was, it appears, killed in
battle)51.
It is now usually recognized that Anytus, the democratic leader
who backed the prosecution, did not intend to make a martyr of
Socrates. The aim was to exile him. But this plan was defeated by
Socrates’ refusal to compromise his principles. That he wanted to
die, or that he enjoyed the role of martyr, I do not believe52. He
simply fought for what he believed to be right, and for his life’s
work. He had never intended to undermine democracy. In fact, he
had tried to give it the faith it needed. This had been the work of
his life. It was, he felt, seriously threatened. The betrayal of his

former companions let his work and himself appear in a light
which must have disturbed him deeply. He may even have
welcomed the trial as an opportunity to prove that his loyalty to his
city was unbounded.
Socrates explained this attitude most carefully when he was
given an opportunity to escape. Had he seized it, and become an
exile, everybody would have thought him an opponent of
democracy. So he stayed, and stated his reasons. This explanation,
his last will, can be found in Plato’s Crito53. It is simple. If I go,
said Socrates, I violate the laws of the state. Such an act would put
me in opposition to the laws, and prove my disloyalty. It would do
harm to the state. Only if I stay can I put beyond doubt my loyalty
to the state, with its democratic laws, and prove that I have never
been its enemy. There can be no better proof of my loyalty than my
willingness to die for it.
Socrates’ death is the ultimate proof of his sincerity. His
fearlessness, his simplicity, his modesty, his sense of proportion,
his humour never deserted him. ‘I am the gadfly that God has
attached to this city’, he said in his Apology, ‘and all day long and
in all places I am always fastening upon you, arousing and
persuading and reproaching you. You would not readily find
another like me, and therefore I should advise you to spare me .. If
you strike at me, as Anytus advises you, and rashly put me to
death, then you will remain asleep for the rest of your lives, unless
God in his care sends you another gadfly’54. He showed that a man
could die, not only for fate and fame and other grand things of this
kind, but also for the freedom of critical thought, and for a selfrespect which has nothing to do with self-importance or
sentimentality.
VI
Socrates had only one worthy successor, his old friend
Antisthenes, the last of the Great Generation. Plato, his most gifted
disciple, was soon to prove the least faithful. He betrayed Socrates,
just as his uncles had done. These, besides betraying Socrates, had
also tried to implicate him in their terrorist acts, but they did not
succeed, since he resisted. Plato tried to implicate Socrates in his
grandiose attempt to construct the theory of the arrested society;
and he had no difficulty in succeeding, for Socrates was dead.
I know of course that this judgement will seem outrageously
harsh, even to those who are critical of Plato55. But if we look upon

the Apology and the Crito as Socrates’ last will, and if we compare
these testaments of his old age with Plato’s testament, the Laws,
then it is difficult to judge otherwise. Socrates had been
condemned, but his death was not intended by the initiators of the
trial. Plato’s Laws remedy this lack of intention. Here he elaborates
coolly and carefully the theory of inquisition. Free thought,
criticism of political institutions, teaching new ideas to the young,
attempts to introduce new religious practices or even opinions, are
all pronounced capital crimes. In Plato’s state, Socrates might have
never been given the opportunity of defending himself publicly;
and he certainly would have been handed over to the secret
Nocturnal Council for the purpose of ‘attending’ to his diseased
soul, and finally for punishing it.
I cannot doubt the fact of Plato’s betrayal, nor that his use of
Socrates as the main speaker of the Republic was the most
successful attempt to implicate him. But it is another question
whether this attempt was conscious.
In order to understand Plato we must visualize the whole
contemporary situation. After the Peloponnesian war, the strain of
civilization was felt as strongly as ever. The old oligarchic hopes
were still alive, and the defeat of Athens had even tended to
encourage them. The class struggle continued. Yet Critias’ attempt
to destroy democracy by carrying out the programme of the Old
Oligarch had failed. It had not failed through lack of
determination; the most ruthless use of violence had been
unsuccessful, in spite of favourable circumstances in the shape of
powerful support from victorious Sparta. Plato felt that a complete
reconstruction of the programme was needed. The Thirty had been
beaten in the realm of power politics largely because they had
offended the citizens’ sense of justice. The defeat had been largely
a moral defeat. The faith of the Great Generation had proved its
strength. The Thirty had nothing of this kind to offer; they were
moral nihilists. The programme of the Old Oligarch, Plato felt,
could not be revived without basing it upon another faith, upon a
persuasion which re-affirmed the old values of tribalism, opposing
them to the faith of the open society. Men must be taught that
justice is inequality, and that the tribe, the collective, stands higher
than the individual56. But since Socrates’ faith was too strong to be
challenged openly, Plato was driven to re-interpret it as a faith in
the closed society. This was difficult; but it was not impossible.
For had not Socrates been killed by the democracy? Had not

democracy lost any right to claim him? And had not Socrates
always criticized the anonymous multitude as well as its leaders for
their lack of wisdom? It was not so very difficult, moreover, to reinterpret Socrates as having recommended the rule of the
‘educated’, the learned philosophers. In this interpretation, Plato
was much encouraged when he discovered that it was also part of
the ancient Pythagorean creed; and most of all, when he found, in
Archytas of Tarentum, a Pythagorean sage as well as a great and
successful statesman. Here, he felt, was the solution of the riddle.
Had not Socrates himself encouraged his disciples to participate in
politics? Did this not mean that he wanted the enlightened, the
wise, to rule? What a difference between the crudity of the ruling
mob of Athens and the dignity of an Archytas! Surely Socrates,
who had never stated his solution of the constitutional problem,
must have had Pythagoreanism in mind.
In this way Plato may have found that it was possible to give
by degrees a new meaning to the teaching of the most influential
member of the Great Generation, and to persuade himself that an
opponent whose overwhelming strength he would never have
dared to attack directly, was an ally. This, I believe, is the simplest
interpretation of the fact that Plato retained Socrates as his main
speaker even after he had departed so widely from his teaching that
he could no longer deceive himself about this deviation57. But it is
not the whole story. He felt, I believe, in the depth of his soul, that
Socrates’ teaching was very different indeed from this
presentation, and that he was betraying Socrates.
And I think that Plato’s continuous efforts to make Socrates reinterpret himself are at the same time Plato’s efforts to quiet his
own bad conscience. By trying again and again to prove that his
teaching was only the logical development of the true Socratic
doctrine, he tried to persuade himself that he was not a traitor.
In reading Plato we are, I feel, witnesses of an inner conflict, of
a truly titanic struggle in Plato’s mind. Even his famous ‘fastidious
reserve, the suppression of his own personality’58, or rather, the
attempted suppression—for it is not at all difficult to read between
the lines—is an expression of this struggle. And I believe that
Plato’s influence can partly be explained by the fascination of this
conflict between two worlds in one soul, a struggle whose
powerful repercussions upon Plato can be felt under that surface of
fastidious reserve. This struggle touches our feelings, for it is still
going on within ourselves. Plato was the child of a time which is

still our own. (We must not forget that it is, after all, only a century
since the abolition of slavery in the United States, and even less
since the abolition of serfdom in Central Europe.) Nowhere does
this inner struggle reveal itself more clearly than in Plato’s theory
of the soul. That Plato, with his longing for unity and harmony,
visualized the structure of the human soul as analogous to that of a
class-divided society59 shows how deeply he must have suffered.
Plato’s greatest conflict arises from the deep impression made
upon him by the example of Socrates, but his own oligarchic
inclinations strive only too successfully against it. In the field of
rational argument, the struggle is conducted by using the argument
of Socrates’ humanitarianism against itself. What appears to be the
earliest example of this kind can be found in the Euthyphro60. I am
not going to be like Euthyphro, Plato assures himself; I shall never
take it upon myself to accuse my own father, my own venerated
ancestors, of having sinned against a law and a humanitarian
morality which is on the level of vulgar piety. Even if they took
human life, it was, after all, only the lives of their own serfs, who
are no better than criminals; and it is not my task to judge them.
Did not Socrates show how hard it is to know what is right and
wrong, pious and impious? And was he not himself prosecuted for
impiety by these so-called humanitarians? Other traces of Plato’s
struggle can, I believe, be found in nearly every place where he
turns against humanitarian ideas, especially in the Republic. His
evasiveness and his resort to scorn in combating the equalitarian
theory of justice, his hesitant preface to his defence of lying, to his
introduction of racialism, and to his definition of justice, have all
been mentioned in previous chapters. But perhaps the clearest
expression of the conflict can be found in the Menexenus, that
sneering reply to Pericles’ funeral oration. Here, I feel, Plato gives
himself away. In spite of his attempt to hide his feelings behind
irony and scorn, he cannot but show how deeply he was impressed
by Pericles’ sentiments. This is how Plato makes his ‘Socrates’
maliciously describe the impression made upon him by Pericles’
oration: ‘A feeling of exultation stays with me for more than three
days; not until the fourth or fifth day, and not without an effort, do
I come to my senses and realize where I am.’61 Who can doubt that
Plato reveals here how seriously he was impressed by the creed of
the open society, and how hard he had to struggle to come to his
senses and to realize where he was—namely, in the camp of its
enemies.

VII
Plato’s strongest argument in this struggle was, I believe,
sincere: According to the humanitarian creed, he argued, we
should be ready to help our neighbours. The people need help
badly, they are unhappy, they labour under a severe strain, a sense
of drift. There is no certainty, no security62 in life, when everything
is in flux. I am ready to help them. But I cannot make them happy
without going to the root of the evil.
And he found the root of the evil. It is the ‘Fall of Man’, the
breakdown of the closed society. This discovery convinced him
that the Old Oligarch and his followers had been fundamentally
right in favouring Sparta against Athens, and in aping the Spartan
programme of arresting change. But they had not gone far enough;
their analysis had not been carried sufficiently deep. They had not
been aware of the fact, or had not cared for it, that even Sparta
showed signs of decay, in spite of its heroic effort to arrest all
change; that even Sparta had been half-hearted in her attempts at
controlling breeding in order to eliminate the causes of the Fall, the
‘variations’ and ‘irregularities’ in the number as well as the quality
of the ruling race63. (Plato realized that population increase was
one of the causes of the Fall.) Also, the Old Oligarch and his
followers had thought, in their superficiality, that with the help of a
tyranny, such as that of the Thirty, they would be able to restore
the good old days. Plato knew better. The great sociologist saw
clearly that these tyrannies were supported by, and that they were
kindling in their turn, the modern revolutionary spirit; that they
were forced to make concessions to the equalitarian cravings of the
people; and that they had indeed played an important part in the
breakdown of tribalism. Plato hated tyranny. Only hatred can see
as sharply as he did in his famous description of the tyrant. Only a
genuine enemy of tyranny could say that tyrants must ‘stir up one
war after another in order to make the people feel the need of a
general’, of a saviour from extreme danger. Tyranny, Plato
insisted, was not the solution, nor any of the current oligarchies.
Although it is imperative to keep the people in their place, their
suppression is not an end in itself. The end must be the complete
return to nature, a complete cleaning of the canvas.
The difference between Plato’s theory on the one hand, and
that of the Old Oligarch and the Thirty on the other, is due to the
influence of the Great Generation. Individualism, equalitarianism,
faith in reason and love of freedom were new, powerful, and, from

the point of view of the enemies of the open society, dangerous
sentiments that had to be fought. Plato had himself felt their
influence, and, within himself, he had fought them. His answer to
the Great Generation was a truly great effort. It was an effort to
close the door which had been opened, and to arrest society by
casting upon it the spell of an alluring philosophy, unequalled in
depth and richness. In the political field he added but little to the
old oligarchic programme against which Pericles had once
argued64. But he discovered, perhaps unconsciously, the great
secret of the revolt against freedom, formulated in our own day by
Pareto65: ‘To take advantage of sentiments, not wasting one’s
energies in futile efforts to destroy them.’ Instead of showing his
hostility to reason, he charmed all intellectuals with his brilliance,
flattering and thrilling them by his demand that the learned should
rule. Although arguing against justice he convinced all righteous
men that he was its advocate. Not even to himself did he fully
admit that he was combating the freedom of thought for which
Socrates had died; and by making Socrates his champion he
persuaded all others that he was fighting for it. Plato thus became,
unconsciously, the pioneer of the many propagandists who, often
in good faith, developed the technique of appealing to moral,
humanitarian sentiments, for anti-humanitarian, immoral purposes.
And he achieved the somewhat surprising effect of convincing
even great humanitarians of the immorality and selfishness of their
creed66. I do not doubt that he succeeded in persuading himself. He
transfigured his hatred of individual initiative, and his wish to
arrest all change, into a love of justice and temperance, of a
heavenly state in which everybody is satisfied and happy and in
which the crudity of money-grabbing67 is replaced by laws of
generosity and friendship. This dream of unity and beauty and
perfection, this aestheticism and holism and collectivism, is the
product as well as the symptom of the lost group spirit of
tribalism68. It is the expression of, and an ardent appeal to, the
sentiments of those who suffer from the strain of civilization. (It is
part of the strain that we are becoming more and more painfully
aware of the gross imperfections in our life, of personal as well as
of institutional imperfection; of avoidable suffering, of waste and
of unnecessary ugliness; and at the same time of the fact that it is
not impossible for us to do something about all this, but that such
improvements would be just as hard to achieve as they are

important. This awareness increases the strain of personal
responsibility, of carrying the cross of being human.)
VIII
Socrates had refused to compromise his personal integrity.
Plato, with all his uncompromising canvas-cleaning, was led along
a path on which he compromised his integrity with every step he
took. He was forced to combat free thought, and the pursuit of
truth. He was led to defend lying, political miracles, tabooistic
superstition, the suppression of truth, and ultimately, brutal
violence. In spite of Socrates’ warning against misanthropy and
misology, he was led to distrust man and to fear argument. In spite
of his own hatred of tyranny, he was led to look to a tyrant for
help, and to defend the most tyrannical measures. By the internal
logic of his anti-humanitarian aim, the internal logic of power, he
was led unawares to the same point to which once the Thirty had
been led, and at which, later, his friend Dio arrived, and others
among his numerous tyrant-disciples69. He did not succeed in
arresting social change. (Only much later, in the dark ages, was it
arrested by the magic spell of the Platonic-Aristotelian
essentialism.) Instead, he succeeded in binding himself, by his own
spell, to powers which once he had hated.
The lesson which we thus should learn from Plato is the exact
opposite of what he tries to teach us. It is a lesson which must not
be forgotten. Excellent as Plato’s sociological diagnosis was, his
own development proves that the therapy he recommended is
worse than the evil he tried to combat. Arresting political change is
not the remedy; it cannot bring happiness. We can never return to
the alleged innocence and beauty of the closed society70. Our
dream of heaven cannot be realized on earth. Once we begin to
rely upon our reason, and to use our powers of criticism, once we
feel the call of personal responsibilities, and with it, the
responsibility of helping to advance knowledge, we cannot return
to a state of implicit submission to tribal magic. For those who
have eaten of the tree of knowledge, paradise is lost. The more we
try to return to the heroic age of tribalism, the more surely do we
arrive at the Inquisition, at the Secret Police, and at a romanticized
gangsterism. Beginning with the suppression of reason and truth,
we must end with the most brutal and violent destruction of all that
is human71. There is no return to a harmonious state of nature. If

we turn back, then we must go the whole way—we must return to
the beasts.
It is an issue which we must face squarely, hard though it may
be for us to do so. If we dream of a return to our childhood, if we
are tempted to rely on others and so be happy, if we shrink from
the task of carrying our cross, the cross of humaneness, of reason,
of responsibility, if we lose courage and flinch from the strain, then
we must try to fortify ourselves with a clear understanding of the
simple decision before us. We can return to the beasts. But if we
wish to remain human, then there is only one way, the way into the
open society. We must go on into the unknown, the uncertain and
insecure, using what reason we may have to plan as well as we can
for both security and freedom.

Volume II: The High Tide of
Prophecy
The Rise Of Oracular Philosophy
To the debacle of liberal science can be traced the moral
schism of the modern world which so tragically divides
enlightened men.
—WALTER LIPPMANN.

Chapter 11: The Aristotelian Roots Of Hegelianism
The task of writing a history of the ideas in which we are
interested—of historicism and its connection with totalitarianism—
will not be attempted here. The reader will remember, I hope, that I
do not even try to give more than a few scattered remarks which
may throw light on the background of the modern version of these
ideas. The story of their development, more particularly during the
period from Plato to Hegel and Marx, could not possibly be told
while keeping the size of the book within reasonable limits. I shall
therefore not attempt a serious treatment of Aristotle, except in so
far as his version of Plato’s essentialism has influenced the
historicism of Hegel, and thereby that of Marx. The restriction to
those ideas of Aristotle with which we have become acquainted in
our criticism of Plato, Aristotle’s great master, does not, however,
create as serious a loss as one might fear at first sight. For
Aristotle, in spite of his stupendous learning and his astonishing

scope, was not a man of striking originality of thought. What he
added to the Platonic store of ideas was, in the main,
systematization and a burning interest in empirical and especially
in biological problems. To be sure, he is the inventor of logic, and
for this and his other achievements, he amply deserves what he
himself claimed (at the end of his Sophistic Refutations)—our
warm thanks, and our pardon for his shortcomings. Yet for readers
and admirers of Plato these shortcomings are formidable.
I
In some of Plato’s latest writings, we can find an echo of the
contemporary political developments in Athens—of the
consolidation of democracy. It seems that even Plato began to
doubt whether some form of democracy had not come to stay. In
Aristotle, we find indications that he did not doubt any longer.
Although he is no friend of democracy, he accepts it as
unavoidable, and is ready to compromise with the enemy.
An inclination to compromise, strangely mixed with an
inclination to find fault with his predecessors and contemporaries
(and with Plato in particular), is one of the outstanding
characteristics of Aristotle’s encyclopaedic writings. They show no
trace of the tragic and stirring conflict that is the motive of Plato’s
work. Instead of Plato’s flashes of penetrating insight, we find dry
systematization and the love, shared by so many mediocre writers
of later times, for settling any question whatever by issuing a
‘sound and balanced judgement’ that does justice to everybody;
which means, at times, by elaborately and solemnly missing the
point. This exasperating tendency which is systematized in
Aristotle’s famous ‘doctrine of the mean’ is one of the sources of
his so often forced and even fatuous criticism of Plato1. An
example of Aristotle’s lack of insight, in this case of historical
insight (he also was a historian), is the fact that he acquiesced in
the apparent democratic consolidation just when it had been
superseded by the imperial monarchy of Macedon; a historical
event which happened to escape his notice. Aristotle, who was, as
his father had been, a courtier at the Macedonian court, chosen by
Philip to be the teacher of Alexander the Great, seems to have
underrated these men and their plans; perhaps he thought he knew
them too well. ‘Aristotle sat down to dinner with Monarchy
without becoming aware of it’, is Gomperz’s appropriate
comment.2

Aristotle’s thought is entirely dominated by Plato’s. Somewhat
grudgingly, he followed his great teacher as closely as his
temperament permitted, not only in his general political outlook
but practically everywhere. So he endorsed, and systematized,
Plato’s naturalistic theory of slavery3: ‘Some men are by nature
free, and others slaves; and for the latter, slavery is fitting as well
as just ... A man who is by nature not his own, but another’s, is by
nature a slave ... Hellenes do not like to call themselves slaves, but
confine this term to barbarians ... The slave is totally devoid of any
faculty of reasoning’, while free women have just a very little of it.
(We owe to Aristotle’s criticisms and denunciations most of our
knowledge of the Athenian movement against slavery. By arguing
against the fighters for freedom, he preserved some of their
utterances.) In some minor points Aristotle slightly mitigates
Plato’s theory of slavery, and duly censures his teacher for being
too harsh. He could neither resist an opportunity for criticizing
Plato, nor one for a compromise, not even if it was a compromise
with the liberal tendencies of his time.
But the theory of slavery is only one of Plato’s many political
ideas to be adopted by Aristotle. Especially his theory of the Best
State, as far as we know it, is modelled upon the theories of the
Republic and the Laws; and his version throws considerable light
on Plato’s. Aristotle’s Best State is a compromise between three
things, a romantic Platonic aristocracy, a ‘sound and balanced’
feudalism, and some democratic ideas; but feudalism has the best
of it. With the democrats, Aristotle holds that all citizens should
have the right to participate in the government. But this, of course,
is not meant to be as radical as it sounds, for Aristotle explains at
once that not only slaves but all members of the producing classes
are excluded from citizenship. Thus he teaches with Plato that the
working classes must not rule and the ruling classes must not work,
nor earn any money. (But they are supposed to have plenty.) They
own the land, but must not work it themselves. Only hunting, war,
and similar hobbies are considered worthy of the feudal rulers.
Aristotle’s fear of any form of money earning, i.e. of all
professional activities, goes perhaps even further than Plato’s.
Plato had used the term ‘banausic’4 to describe a plebeian, abject,
or depraved state of mind. Aristotle extends the disparaging use of
the term so as to cover all interests which are not pure hobbies. In
fact, his use of the term is very near to our use of the term
‘professional’, more especially in the sense in which it disqualifies

in an amateur competition, but also in the sense in which it applies
to any specialized expert, such as a physician. For Aristotle, every
form of professionalism means a loss of caste. A feudal gentleman,
he insists5, must never take too much interest in ‘any occupation,
art or science ... There are also some liberal arts, that is to say, arts
which a gentleman may acquire, but always only to a certain
degree. For if he takes too much interest in them, then these evil
effects will follow’, namely, he will become proficient, like a
professional, and lose caste. This is Aristotle’s idea of a liberal
education, the idea, unfortunately not yet obsolete6, of a
gentleman’s education, as opposed to the education of a slave, serf,
servant, or professional man. It is in the same vein that he
repeatedly insists that ‘the first principle of all action is leisure’7.
Aristotle’s admiration and deference for the leisured classes seems
to be the expression of a curious feeling of uneasiness. It looks as
if the son of the Macedonian court physician was troubled by the
question of his own social position, and especially by the
possibility that he might lose caste because of his own scholarly
interests which might be considered professional. ‘One is tempted
to believe’, says Gomperz8, ‘that he feared to hear such
denunciations from his aristocratic friends .. It is indeed strange to
see that one of the greatest scholars of all time, if not the greatest,
does not wish to be a professional scholar. He would rather be a
dilettante, and a man of the world ..’ Aristotle’s feelings of
inferiority have, perhaps, still another basis, apart from his wish to
prove his independence of Plato, apart from his own ‘professional’
origin, and apart from the fact that he was, undoubtedly, a
professional ‘sophist’ (he even taught rhetoric). For with Aristotle,
Platonic philosophy gives up her great aspirations, her claims to
power. From this moment, it could continue only as a teaching
profession. And since hardly anybody but a feudal lord had the
money and the leisure for studying philosophy, all that philosophy
could aspire to was to become an annex to the traditional education
of a gentleman. With this more modest aspiration in view, Aristotle
finds it very necessary to persuade the feudal gentleman that
philosophical speculation and contemplation may become a most
important part of his ‘good life’; for it is the happiest and noblest
and the most refined method of whiling away one’s time, if one is
not occupied with political intrigues or by war. It is the best way of
spending one’s leisure since, as Aristotle himself puts it, ‘nobody ..
would arrange a war for that purpose’9.

It is plausible to assume that such a courtier’s philosophy will
tend to be optimistic, since it will hardly be a pleasant pastime
otherwise. And indeed, in its optimism lies the one important
adjustment made by Aristotle in his systematization10 of Platonism.
Plato’s sense of drift had expressed itself in his theory that all
change, at least in certain cosmic periods, must be for the worse;
all change is degeneration. Aristotle’s theory admits of changes
which are improvements; thus change may be progress. Plato had
taught that all development starts from the original, the perfect
Form or Idea, so that the developing thing must lose its perfection
in the degree in which it changes and in which its similarity to the
original decreases. This theory was given up by his nephew and
successor, Speusippus, as well as by Aristotle. But Aristotle
censured Speusippus’ arguments as going too far, since they
implied a general biological evolution towards higher forms.
Aristotle, it seems, was opposed to the much-discussed
evolutionary biological theories of his time11. But the peculiar
optimistic twist which he gave to Platonism was an outcome of
biological speculation also. It was based upon the idea of a final
cause.
According to Aristotle, one of the four causes of anything—
also of any movement or change—is the final cause, or the end
towards which the movement aims. In so far as it is an aim or a
desired end, the final cause is also good. It follows from this that
some good may not only be the starting point of a movement (as
Plato had taught, and as Aristotle admitted12) but that some good
must also stand at its end. And this is particularly important for
anything that has a beginning in time, or, as Aristotle puts it, for
anything that comes into being. The Form or essence of anything
developing is identical with the purpose or end or final state
towards which it develops. Thus we obtain after all, in spite of
Aristotle’s disclaimer, something very closely resembling
Speusippus’ adjustment of Platonism. The Form or Idea, which is
still, with Plato, considered to be good, stands at the end, instead of
the beginning. This characterizes Aristotle’s substitution of
optimism for pessimism.
Aristotle’s teleology, i.e. his stress upon the end or aim of
change as its final cause, is an expression of his predominantly
biological interests. It is influenced by Plato’s biological theories13,
and also by Plato’s extension of his theory of justice to the
universe. For Plato did not confine himself to teaching that each of

the different classes of citizens has its natural place in society, a
place to which it belongs and for which it is naturally fitted; he
also tried to interpret the world of physical bodies and their
different classes or kinds on similar principles. He tried to explain
the weight of heavy bodies, like stones, or earth, and their tendency
to fall, as well as the tendency of air and fire to rise, by the
assumption that they strive to retain, or to regain, the place
inhabitated by their kind. Stones and earth fall because they strive
to be where most stones and earth are, and where they belong, in
the just order of nature; air and fire rise because they strive to be
where air and fire (the heavenly bodies) are, and where they
belong, in the just order of nature14. This theory of motion
appealed to the zoologist Aristotle; it combines easily with the
theory of final causes, and it allows an explanation of all motion as
being analogous with the canter of horses keen to return to their
stables. He developed it as his famous theory of natural places.
Everything if removed from its own natural place has a natural
tendency to return to it.
Despite some alterations, Aristotle’s version of Plato’s
essentialism shows only unimportant differences. Aristotle insists,
of course, that unlike Plato he does not conceive the Forms or
Ideas as existing apart from sensible things. But in so far as this
difference is important, it is closely connected with the adjustment
in the theory of change. For one of the main points in Plato’s
theory is that he must consider the Forms or essences or originals
(or fathers) as existing prior to, and therefore apart from, sensible
things, since these move further and further away from them.
Aristotle makes sensible things move towards their final causes or
ends, and these he identifies15 with their Forms or essences. And as
a biologist, he assumes that sensible things carry potentially within
themselves the seeds, as it were, of their final states, or of their
essences. This is one of the reasons why he can say that the Form
or essence is in the thing, not, as Plato said, prior and external to it.
For Aristotle, all movement or change means the realization (or
‘actualization’) of some of the potentialities inherent in the essence
of a thing16. It is, for example, an essential potentiality of a piece of
timber, that it can float on water, or that it can burn; these
potentialities remain inherent in its essence even if it should never
float or burn. But if it does, then it realizes a potentiality, and
thereby changes or moves. Accordingly, the essence, which
embraces all the potentialities of a thing, is something like its.

internal source of change or motion. This Aristotelian essence or
Form, this ‘formal’ or ‘final’ cause, is therefore practically
identical with Plato’s ‘nature’ or ‘soul’; and this identification is
corroborated by Aristotle himself. ‘Nature’, he writes17 in the
Metaphysics, ‘belongs also to the same class as potentiality; for it
is a principle of movement inherent in the thing itself.’ On the
other hand, he defines the ‘soul’ as the ‘first entelechy of a living
body’, and since ‘entelechy’, in turn, is explained as the Form, or
the formal cause, considered as a motive force18, we arrive, with
the help of this somewhat complicated terminological apparatus,
back at Plato’s original point of view: that the soul or nature is
something akin to the Form or Idea, but inherent in the thing, and
its principle of motion. (When Zeller praised Aristotle for his
‘definite use and comprehensive development of a scientific
terminology’19, I think he must have felt a bit uneasy in using the
word ‘definite’; but the comprehensiveness is to be admitted, as
well as the most deplorable fact that Aristotle, by using this
complicated and somewhat pretentious jargon, fascinated only too
many philosophers; so that, as Zeller puts it, ‘for thousands of
years he showed philosophy her way’.)
Aristotle, who was a historian of the more encyclopaedic type,
made no direct contribution to historicism. He adhered to a more
restricted version of Plato’s theory that floods and other recurring
catastrophes destroy the human race from time to time, leaving
only a few survivors.20 But he does not seem, apart from this, to
have interested himself in the problem of historical trends. In spite
of this fact, it may be shown here how his theory of change lends
itself to historicist interpretations, and that it contains all the
elements needed for elaborating a grandiose historicist philosophy.
(This opportunity was not fully exploited before Hegel.) Three
historicist doctrines which directly follow from Aristotle’s
essentialism may be distinguished.
(1) Only if a person or a state develops, and only by way of its
history, can we get to know anything about its ‘hidden,
undeveloped essence’ (to use a phrase of Hegel’s21). This doctrine
leads later, first of all, to the adoption of an historicist method; that
is to say, of the principle that we can obtain any knowledge of
social entities or essences only by applying the historical method,
by studying social changes. But the doctrine leads further
(especially when connected with Hegel’s moral positivism which
identifies the known as well as the real with the good) to the

worship of History and its exaltation as the Grand Theatre of
Reality as well as the World’s Court of Justice.
(2) Change, by revealing what is hidden in the undeveloped
essence, can only make apparent the essence, the potentialities, the
seeds, which from the beginning have inhered in the changing
object. This doctrine leads to the historicist idea of an historical
fate or an inescapable essential destiny; for, as Hegel22 showed
later, ‘what we call principle, aim, destiny’ is nothing but the
‘hidden undeveloped essence’. This means that whatever may
befall a man, a nation, or a state, must be considered to emanate
from, and to be understandable through, the essence, the real thing,
the real ‘personality’ that manifests itself in this man, this nation,
or this state. ‘A man’s fate is immediately connected with his own
being; it is something which, indeed, he may fight against, but
which is really a part of his own life.’ This formulation (due to
Caird23) of Hegel’s theory of fate is clearly the historical and
romantic counterpart of Aristotle’s theory that all bodies seek their
own ‘natural places’. It is, of course, no more than a bombastic
expression of the platitude, that what befalls a man depends not
only on his external circumstances, but also on himself, on the way
he reacts to them. But the naive reader is extremely pleased with
his ability to understand, and to feel the truth of this depth of
wisdom that needs to be formulated with the help of such thrilling
words as ‘fate’ and especially ‘his own being’. (3) In order to
become real or actual, the essence must unfold itself in change.
This doctrine assumes later, with Hegel, the following form24:
‘That which exists for itself only, is .. a mere potentiality: it has not
yet emerged into Existence ... It is only by activity that the Idea is
actualized.’ Thus if I wish to ‘emerge into Existence’ (surely a
very modest wish), then I must ‘assert my personality’. This still
rather popular theory leads, as Hegel sees clearly, to a new
justification of the theory of slavery. For self-assertion means25, in
so far as one’s relations to others are concerned, the attempt to
dominate them. Indeed, Hegel points out that all personal relations
can thus be reduced to the fundamental relation of master and
slave, of domination and submission. Each must strive to assert
and prove himself, and he who has not the nature, the courage, and
the general capacity for preserving his independence, must be
reduced to servitude. This charming theory of personal relations
has, of course, its counterpart in Hegel’s theory of international

relations. Nations must assert themselves on the Stage of History;
it is their duty to attempt the domination of the World.
All these far-reaching historicist consequences, which will be
approached from a different angle in the next chapter, were
slumbering for more than twenty centuries, ‘hidden and
undeveloped’, in Aristotle’s essentialism. Aristotelianism was
more fertile and promising than most of its many admirers know.
II
The chief danger to our philosophy, apart from laziness and
woolliness, is scholasticism, .. which is treating what is vague as if
it were precise.
—F. P. RAMSEY.
We have reached a point from which we could without delay
proceed to an analysis of the historicist philosophy of Hegel, or, at
any rate, to the brief comments upon the developments between
Aristotle and Hegel and upon the rise of Christianity that conclude,
as section III, the present chapter. As a kind of digression,
however, I shall next discuss a more technical problem, Aristotle’s
essentialist method of Definitions.
The problem of definitions and of the ‘meaning of terms’ does
not directly bear upon historicism. But it has been an inexhaustible
source of confusion and of that particular kind of verbiage which,
when combined with historicism in Hegel’s mind, has bred that
poisonous intellectual disease of our own time which I call
oracular philosophy. And it is the most important source of
Aristotle’s regrettably still prevailing intellectual influence, of all
that verbal and empty scholasticism that haunts not only the
Middle Ages, but our own contemporary philosophy; for even a
philosophy as recent as that of L. Wittgenstein26 suffers, as we
shall see, from this influence. The development of thought since
Aristotle could, I think, be summed up by saying that every
discipline, as long as it used the Aristotelian method of definition,
has remained arrested in a state of empty verbiage and barren
scholasticism, and that the degree to which the various sciences
have been able to make any progress depended on the degree to
which they have been able to get rid of this essentialist method.
(This is why so much of our ‘social science’ still belongs to the
Middle Ages.) The discussion of this method will have to be a little
abstract, owing to the fact that the problem has been so thoroughly

muddled by Plato and Aristotle, whose influence has given rise to
such deep-rooted prejudices that the prospect of dispelling them
does not seem very bright. In spite of all that, it is perhaps not
without interest to analyse the source of so much confusion and
verbiage.
Aristotle followed Plato in distinguishing between knowledge
and opinion27. Knowledge, or science, according to Aristotle, may
be of two kinds—either demonstrative or intuitive. Demonstrative
knowledge is also a knowledge of ‘causes’. It consists of
statements that can be demonstrated—the conclusions—together
with their syllogistic demonstrations (which exhibit the ‘causes’ in
their ‘middle terms’). Intuitive knowledge consists in grasping the
‘indivisible form’ or essence or essential nature of a thing (if it is’
immediate’, i.e. if its ‘cause’ is identical with its essential nature);
it is the originative source of all science since it grasps the original
basic premises of all demonstrations.
Undoubtedly, Aristotle was right when he insisted that we must
not attempt to prove or demonstrate all our knowledge. Every
proof must proceed from premises; the proof as such, that is to say,
the derivation from the premises, can therefore never finally settle
the truth of any conclusion, but only show that the conclusion must
be true provided the premises are true. If we were to demand that
the premises should be proved in their turn, the question of truth
would only be shifted back by another step to a new set of
premises, and so on, to infinity. It was in order to avoid such an
infinite regress (as the logicians say) that Aristotle taught that we
must assume that there are premises which are indubitably true,
and which do not need any proof; and these he called ‘basic
premises’. If we take for granted the methods by which we derive
conclusions from these basic premises, then we could say that,
according to Aristotle, the whole of scientific knowledge is
contained in the basic premises, and that it would all be ours if
only we could obtain an encyclopaedic list of the basic premises.
But how to obtain these basic premises? Like Plato, Aristotle
believed that we obtain all knowledge ultimately by an intuitive
grasp of the essences of things. ‘We can know a thing only by
knowing its essence’, Aristotle writes28, and ‘to know a thing is to
know its essence’. A ‘basic premise’ is, according to him, nothing
but a statement describing the essence of a thing. But such a
statement is just what he calls29 a definition. Thus all ‘basic
premises of proofs’ are definitions.

What does a definition look like? An example of a definition
would be: ‘A puppy is a young dog.’ The subject of such a
definition-sentence, the term ‘puppy’, is called the term to be
defined (or defined term); the words ‘young dog’ are called the
defining formula. As a rule, the defining formula is longer and
more complicated than the defined term, and sometimes very much
so. Aristotle considers30 the term to be defined as a name of the
essence of a thing, and the defining formula as the description of
that essence. And he insists that the defining formula must give an
exhaustive description of the essence or the essential properties of
the thing in question; thus a statement like ‘A puppy has four legs’,
although true, is not a satisfactory definition, since it does not
exhaust what may be calico the essence of puppiness, but holds
true of a horse also; and similarly the statement ‘A puppy is
brown’, although it may be true of some, is not true of all puppies;
and it describes what is not an essential but merely an accidental
property of the defined term.
But the most difficult question is how we can get hold of
definitions or basic premises, and make sure that they are correct—
that we have not erred, not grasped the wrong essence. Although
Aristotle is not very clear on this point31, there can be little doubt
that, in the main, he again follows Plato. Plato taught32 that we can
grasp the Ideas with the help of some kind of unerring intellectual
intuition; that is to say, we visualize or look at them with our
‘mental eye’, a process which he conceived as analogous to seeing,
but dependent purely upon our intellect, and excluding any element
that depends upon our senses. Aristotle’s view is less radical and
less inspired than Plato’s, but in the end it amounts to the same33.
For although he teaches that we arrive at the definition only after
we have made many observations, he admits that sense-experience
does not in itself grasp the universal essence, and that it cannot,
therefore, fully determine a definition. Eventually he simply
postulates that we possess an intellectual intuition, a mental or
intellectual faculty which enables us unerringly to grasp the
essences of things, and to know them. And he further assumes that
if we know an essence intuitively, we must be capable of
describing it and therefore of defining it. (His arguments in the
Posterior Analytic in favour of this theory are surprisingly weak.
They consist merely in pointing out that our knowledge of the
basic premises cannot be demonstrative, since this would lead to
an infinite regress, and that the basic premises must be at least as

true and as certain as the conclusions based upon them. ‘It follows
from this’, he writes, ‘that there cannot be demonstrative
knowledge of the primary premises; and since nothing but
intellectual intuition can be more true than demonstrative
knowledge, it follows that it must be intellectual intuition that
grasps the basic premises.’ In the De Anima, and in the theological
part of the Metaphysics, we find more of an argument; for here we
have a theory of intellectual intuition—that it comes into contact
with its object, the essence, and that it even becomes one with its
object. ‘Actual knowledge is identical with its object.’)
Summing up this brief analysis, we can give, I believe, a fair
description of the Aristotelian ideal of perfect and complete
knowledge if we say that he saw the ultimate aim of all inquiry in
the compilation of an encyclopaedia containing the intuitive
definitions of all essences, that is to say, their names together with
their defining formulae; and that he considered the progress of
knowledge as consisting in the gradual accumulation of such an
encyclopaedia, in expanding it as well as in filling up the gaps in it
and, of course, in the syllogistic derivation from it of ‘the whole
body of facts’ which constitute demonstrative knowledge. Now
there can be little doubt that all these essentialist views stand in the
strongest possible contrast to the methods of modern science. (I
have the empirical sciences in mind, not perhaps pure
mathematics.) First, although in science we do our best to find the
truth, we are conscious of the fact that we can never be sure
whether we have got it. We have learned in the past, from many
disappointments, that we must not expect finality. And we have
learned not to be disappointed any longer if our scientific theories
are overthrown; for we can, in most cases, determine with great
confidence which of any two theories is the better one. We can
therefore know that we are making progress; and it is this
knowledge that to most of us atones for the loss of the illusion of
finality and certainty. In other words, we know that our scientific
theories must always remain hypotheses, but that, in many
important cases, we can find out whether or not a new hypothesis
is superior to an old one. For if they are different, then they will
lead to different predictions, which can often be tested
experimentally; and on the basis of such a crucial experiment, we
can sometimes find out that the new theory leads to satisfactory
results where the old one breaks down. Thus we can say that in our
search for truth, we have replaced scientific certainty by scientific

progress. And this view of scientific method is corroborated by the
development of science. For science does not develop by a gradual
encyclopaedic accumulation of essential information, as Aristotle
thought, but by a much more revolutionary method; it progresses
by bold ideas, by the advancement of new and very strange
theories (such as the theory that the earth is not flat, or that
‘metrical space’ is not flat), and by the overthrow of the old ones.
But this view of scientific method means34 that in science there
is no ‘knowledge’, in the sense in which Plato and Aristotle
understood the word, in the sense which implies finality; in
science, we never have sufficient reason for the belief that we have
attained the truth. What we usually call ‘scientific knowledge’ is,
as a rule, not knowledge in this sense, but rather information
regarding the various competing hypotheses and the way in which
they have stood up to various tests; it is, using the language of
Plato and Aristotle, information concerning the latest, and the best
tested, scientific ‘opinion’. This view means furthermore, that we
have no proofs in science (excepting, of course, pure mathematics
and logic). In the empirical sciences, which alone can furnish us
with information about the world we live in, proofs do not occur, if
we mean by ‘proof’ an argument which establishes once and for
ever the truth of a theory. (What may occur, however, are
refutations of scientific theories.) On the other hand, pure
mathematics and logic, which permit of proofs, give us no
information about the world, but only develop the means of
describing it. Thus we could say (as I have pointed out
elsewhere35): ‘In so far as scientific statements refer to the world of
experience, they must be refutable; and, in so far as they are
irrefutable, they do not refer to the world of experience.’ But
although proof does not play any part in the empirical sciences,
argument still does36; indeed, its part is at least as important as that
played by observation and experiment.
The role of definitions in science, especially, is also very
different from what Aristotle had in mind. Aristotle taught that in a
definition we have first pointed to the essence—perhaps by naming
it—and that we then describe it with the help of the defining
formula; just as in an ordinary sentence like ‘This puppy is brown’,
we first point to a certain thing by saying ‘this puppy’, and then
describe it as ‘brown’. And he taught that by thus describing the
essence to which the term points which is to be defined, we
determine or explain the meaning37 of the term also. Accordingly,

the definition may at one time answer two very closely related
questions. The one is ‘What is it?’, for example, ‘What is a
puppy?’; it asks what the essence is which is denoted by the
defined term. The other is ‘What does it mean?’, for example,
‘What does “puppy” mean?’; it asks for the meaning of a term
(namely, of the term that denotes the essence). In the present
context, it is not necessary to distinguish between these two
questions; rather, it is important to see what they have in common;
and I wish, especially, to draw attention to the fact that both
questions are raised by the term that stands, in the definition, on
the left side and answered by the defining formula which stands on
the right side. This fact characterizes the essentialist view, from
which the scientific method of definition radically differs.
While we may say that the essentialist interpretation reads a
definition ‘normally’, that is to say, from the left to the right, we
can say that a definition, as it is normally used in modern science,
must be read back to front, or from the right to the left; for it starts
with the defining formula, and asks for a short label to it. Thus the
scientific view of the definition ‘A puppy is a young dog’ would be
that it is an answer to the question ‘What shall we call a young
dog?’ rather than an answer to the question ‘What is a puppy?’.
(Questions like ‘What is life?’ or ‘What is gravity?’ do not play
any role in science.) The scientific use of definitions, characterized
by the approach ‘from the right to the left’, may be called its
nominalist interpretation, as opposed to its Aristotelian or
essentialist interpretation38. In modern science, only39 nominalist
definitions occur, that is to say, shorthand symbols or labels are
introduced in order to cut a long story short. And we can at once
see from this that definitions do not play any very important part in
science. For shorthand symbols can always, of course, be replaced
by the longer expressions, the defining formula, for which they
stand. In some cases this would make our scientific language very
cumbersome; we should waste time and paper. But we should
never lose the slightest piece of factual information. Our ‘scientific
knowledge’, in the sense in which this term may be properly used,
remains entirely unaffected if we eliminate all definitions; the only
effect is upon our language, which would lose, not precision40, but
merely brevity. (This must not be taken to mean that in science
there cannot be an urgent practical need for introducing definitions,
for brevity’s sake.) There could hardly be a greater contrast than
that between this view of the part played by definitions, and

Aristotle’s view. For Aristotle’s essentialist definitions are the
principles from which all our knowledge is derived; they thus
contain all our knowledge; and they serve to substitute a long
formula for a short one. As opposed to this, the scientific or
nominalist definitions do not contain any knowledge whatever, not
even any ‘opinion’; they do nothing but introduce new arbitrary
shorthand labels; they cut a long story short.
In practice, these labels are of the greatest usefulness. In order
to see this, we only need to consider the extreme difficulties that
would arise if a bacteriologist, whenever he spoke of a certain
strain of bacteria, had to repeat its whole description (including the
methods of dyeing, etc., by which it is distinguished from a
number of similar species). And we may also understand, by a
similar consideration, why it has so often been forgotten, even by
scientists, that scientific definitions must be read ‘from the right to
the left’, as explained above. For most people, when first studying
a science, say bacteriology, must try to find out the meanings of all
these new technical terms with which they are faced. In this way,
they really learn the definition ‘from the left to the right’,
substituting, as if it were an essentialist definition, a very long
story for a very short one. But this is merely a psychological
accident, and a teacher or writer of a textbook may indeed proceed
quite differently; that is to say, he may introduce a technical term
only after the need for it has arisen41.
So far I have tried to show that the scientific or nominalist use
of definitions is entirely different from Aristotle’s essentialist
method of definitions. But it can also be shown that the essentialist
view of definitions is simply untenable in itself. In order not to
prolong this digression unduly42, I shall criticize two only of the
essentialist doctrines; two doctrines which are of significance
because some influential modern schools are still based upon them.
One is the esoteric doctrine of intellectual intuition, and the other
the very popular doctrine that ‘we must define our terms’, if we
wish to be precise.
Aristotle held with Plato that we possess a faculty, intellectual
intuition, by which we can visualize essences and find out which
definition is the correct one, and many modern essentialists have
repeated this doctrine. Other philosophers, following Kant,
maintain that we do not possess anything of the sort. My opinion is
that we can readily admit that we possess something which may be
described as ‘intellectual intuition’; or more precisely, that certain

of our intellectual experiences may be thus described. Everybody
who ‘understands’ an idea, or a point of view, or an arithmetical
method, for instance, multiplication, in the sense that he has ‘got
the feel of it’, might be said to understand that thing intuitively;
and there are countless intellectual experiences of that kind. But I
would insist, on the other hand, that these experiences, important
as they may be for our scientific endeavours, can never serve to
establish the truth of any idea or theory, however strongly
somebody may feel, intuitively, that it must be true, or that it is
‘self-evident’43. Such intuitions cannot even serve as an argument,
although they may encourage us to look for arguments. For
somebody else may have just as strong an intuition that the same
theory is false. The way of science is paved with discarded theories
which were once declared self-evident; Francis Bacon, for
example, sneered at those who denied the self-evident truth that the
sun and the stars rotated round the earth, which was obviously at
rest. Intuition undoubtedly plays a great part in the life of a
scientist, just as it does in the life of a poet. It leads him to his
discoveries. But it may also lead him to his failures. And it always
remains his private affair, as it were. Science does not ask how he
has got his ideas, it is only interested in arguments that can be
tested by everybody. The great mathematician, Gauss, described
this situation very neatly once when he exclaimed: ‘I have got my
result; but I do not know yet how to get it.’ All this applies, of
course, to Aristotle’s doctrine of intellectual intuition of so-called
essences44, which was propagated by Hegel, and in our own time
by E. Husserl and his numerous pupils; and it indicates that the
‘intellectual intuition of essences’ or ‘pure phenomenology’, as
Husserl calls it, is a method of neither science nor philosophy.
(The much debated question whether it is a new invention, as the
pure phenomenologists think, or perhaps a version of Cartesianism
or Hegelianism, can be easily decided; it is a version of
Aristotelianism.)
The second doctrine to be criticized has even more important
connections with modern views; and it bears especially upon the
problem of verbalism. Since Aristotle, it has become widely
known that one cannot prove all statements, and that an attempt to
do so would break down because it would lead only to an infinite
regression of proofs. But neither he45 nor, apparently, a great many
modern writers seem to realize that the analogous attempt to define
the meaning of all our terms must, in the same way, lead to an

infinite regression of definitions. The following passage from
Grossman’s Plato To-Day is characteristic of a view which by
implication is held by many contemporary philosophers of repute,
for example, by Wittgenstein46: ‘… if we do not know precisely
the meanings of the words we use, we cannot discuss anything
profitably. Most of the futile arguments on which we all waste time
are largely due to the fact that we each have our own vague
meanings for the words we use and assume that our opponents are
using them in the same senses. If we defined our terms to start with
we could have far more profitable discussions. Again, we have
only to read the daily papers to observe that propaganda (the
modern counterpart of rhetoric) depends largely for its success on
confusing the meaning of the terms. If politicians were compelled
by law to define any term they wished to use, they would lose most
of their popular appeal, their speeches would be shorter, and many
of their disagreements would be found to be purely verbal.’ This
passage is very characteristic of one of the prejudices which we
owe to Aristotle, of the prejudice that language can be made more
precise by the use of definitions. Let us consider whether this can
really be done.
First, we can see clearly that if ‘politicians’ (or anybody else)
‘were compelled by law to define any term they wished to use’,
their speeches would not be shorter, but infinitely long. For a
definition cannot establish the meaning of a term any more than a
logical derivation47 can establish the truth of a statement; both can
only shift this problem back. The derivation shifts the problem of
truth back to the premises, the definition shifts the problem of
meaning back to the defining terms (i.e., the terms that make up
the defining formula). But these, for many reasons48, are likely to
be just as vague and confusing as the terms we started with; and in
any case, we should have to go on to define them in turn; which
leads to new terms which too must be defined. And so on, to
infinity. One sees that the demand that all our terms should be
defined is just as untenable as the demand that all our statements
should be proved.
At first sight this criticism may seem unfair. It may be said that
what people have in mind, if they demand definitions, is the
elimination of the ambiguities so often connected with words such
as49 ‘democracy’, ‘liberty’, ‘duty’, ‘religion’, etc.; that it is clearly
impossible to define all our terms, but possible to define some of
these more dangerous terms and to leave it at that; and that the

defining terms have just to be accepted, i.e., that we must stop after
a step or two in order to avoid an infinite regression. This defence,
however, is untenable. Admittedly, the terms mentioned are much
misused. But I deny that the attempt to define them can improve
matters. It can only make matters worse. That by ‘defining their
terms’ even once, and leaving the defining terms undefined, the
politicians would not be able to make their speeches shorter, is
clear; for any essentialist definition, i.e. one that ‘defines our
terms’ (as opposed to the nominalist one which introduces new
technical terms), means the substitution of a long story for a short
one, as we have seen. Besides, the attempt to define terms would
only increase the vagueness and confusion. For since we cannot
demand that all the defining terms should be defined in their turn, a
clever politician or philosopher could easily satisfy the demand for
definitions. If asked what he means by ‘democracy’, for example,
he could say ‘the rule of the general will’ or ‘the rule of the spirit
of the people’; and since he has now given a definition, and so
satisfied the highest standards of precision, nobody will dare to
criticize him any longer. And, indeed, how could he be criticized,
since the demand that ‘rule,’ or ‘people ‘or ‘will’ or ‘spirit’ should
be defined in their turn, puts us well on the way to an infinite
regression so that everybody would hesitate to raise it? But should
it be raised in spite of all that, then it can be equally easily
satisfied. On the other hand, a quarrel about the question whether
the definition was correct, or true, can only lead to an empty
controversy about words.
Thus the essentialist view of definition breaks down, even if it
does not, with Aristotle, attempt to establish the ‘principles’ of our
knowledge, but only makes the apparently more modest demand
that we should ‘define the meaning of our terms’.
But undoubtedly, the demand that we speak clearly and without
ambiguity is very important, and must be satisfied. Can the
nominalist view satisfy it? And can nominalism escape the infinite
regression?
It can. For the nominalist position there is no difficulty which
corresponds to the infinite regression. As we have seen, science
does not use definitions in order to determine the meaning of its
terms, but only in order to introduce handy shorthand labels. And it
does not depend on definitions; all definitions can be omitted
without loss to the information imparted. It follows from this that
in science, all the terms that are really needed must be undefined

terms. How then do the sciences make sure of the meanings of
their terms? Various replies to this question have been suggested50,
but I do not think that any of them are satisfactory. The situation
seems to be this. Aristotelianism and related philosophies have told
us for such a long time how important it is to get a precise
knowledge of the meaning of our terms that we are all inclined to
believe it. And we continue to cling to this creed in spite of the
unquestionable fact that philosophy, which for twenty centuries
has worried about the meaning of its terms, is not only full of
verbalism but also appallingly vague and ambiguous, while a
science like physics which worries hardly at all about terms and
their meaning, but about facts instead, has achieved great
precision. This, surely, should be taken as indicating, that, under
Aristotelian influence, the importance of the meaning of terms has
been grossly exaggerated. But I think that it indicates even more.
For not only does this concentration on the problem of meaning
fail to establish precision; it is itself the main source of vagueness,
ambiguity, and confusion.
In science, we take care that the statements we make should
never depend upon the meaning of our terms. Even where the
terms are defined, we never try to derive any information from the
definition, or to base any argument upon it. This is why our terms
make so little trouble. We do not overburden them. We try to
attach to them as little weight as possible. We do not take their
‘meaning’ too seriously. We are always conscious that our terms
are a little vague (since we have learned to use them only in
practical applications) and we reach precision not by reducing their
penumbra of vagueness, but rather by keeping well within it, by
carefully phrasing our sentences in such a way that the possible
shades of meaning of our terms do not matter. This is how we
avoid quarrelling about words.
The view that the precision of science and of scientific
language depends upon the precision of its terms is certainly very
plausible, but it is none the less, I believe, a mere prejudice. The
precision of a language depends, rather, just upon the fact that it
takes care not to burden its terms with the task of being precise. A
term like ‘sand-dune’ or ‘wind’ is certainly very vague. (How
many inches high must a little sand-hill be in order to be called
‘sand-dune’? How quickly must the air move in order to be called
‘wind’?) However, for many of the geologist’s purposes, these
terms are quite sufficiently precise; and for other purposes, when a

higher degree of differentiation is needed, he can always say
‘dunes between 4 and 30 feet high’ or ‘wind of a velocity of
between 20 and 40 miles an hour’. And the position in the more
exact sciences is analogous. In physical measurements, for
instance, we always take care to consider the range within which
there may be an error; and precision does not consist in trying to
reduce this range to nothing, or in pretending that there is no such
range, but rather in its explicit recognition.
Even where a term has made trouble, as for instance the term
‘simultaneity’ in physics, it was not because its meaning was
unprecise or ambiguous, but rather because of some intuitive
theory which induced us to burden the term with too much
meaning, or with too ‘precise’ a meaning, rather than with too
little. What Einstein found in his analysis of simultaneity was that,
when speaking of simultaneous events, physicists made a false
assumption which would have been unchallengeable were there
signals of infinite velocity. The fault was not that they did not
mean anything, or that their meaning was ambiguous, or the term
not precise enough; what Einstein found was, rather, that the
elimination of a theoretical assumption, unnoticed so far because
of its intuitive self-evidence, was able to remove a difficulty which
had arisen in science. Accordingly, he was not really concerned
with a question of the meaning of a term, but rather with the truth
of a theory. It is very unlikely that it would have led to much if
someone had started, apart from a definite physical problem, to
improve the concept of simultaneity by analysing its ‘essential
meaning’, or even by analysing what physicists ‘really mean’ when
they speak of simultaneity.
I think we can learn from this example that we should not
attempt to cross our bridges before we come to them. And I also
think that the preoccupation with questions concerning the
meaning of terms, such as their vagueness or their ambiguity, can
certainly not be justified by an appeal to Einstein’s example. Such
a preoccupation rests, rather, on the assumption that much depends
upon the meaning of our terms, and that we operate with this
meaning; and therefore it must lead to verbalism and scholasticism.
From this point of view, we may criticize a doctrine like that of
Wittgenstein51, who holds that while science investigates matters
of fact, it is the business of philosophy to clarify the meaning of
terms, thereby purging our language, and eliminating linguistic
puzzles. It is characteristic of the views of this school that they do

not lead to any chain of argument that could be rationally
criticized; the school therefore addresses its subtle analyses52
exclusively to the small esoteric circle of the initiated. This seems
to suggest that any preoccupation with meaning tends to lead to
that result which is so typical of Aristotelianism: scholasticism and
mysticism.
Let us consider briefly how these two typical results of
Aristotelianism have arisen. Aristotle insisted that demonstration
or proof, and definition, are the two fundamental methods of
obtaining knowledge. Considering the doctrine of proof first it
cannot be denied that it has led to countless attempts to prove more
than can be proved; medieval philosophy is full of this
scholasticism and the same tendency can be observed, on the
Continent, down to Kant. It was Kant’s criticism of all attempts to
prove the existence of God which led to the romantic reaction of
Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel. The new tendency is to discard
proofs, and with them, any kind of rational argument. With the
romantics, a new kind of dogmatism becomes fashionable, in
philosophy as well as in the social sciences. It confronts us with its
dictum. And we can take it or leave it. This romantic period of an
oracular philosophy, called by Schopenhauer the ‘age of
dishonesty’, is described by him as follows53: ‘The character of
honesty, that spirit of undertaking an inquiry together with the
reader, which permeates the works of all previous philosophers,
disappears here completely. Every page witnesses that these socalled philosophers do not attempt to teach, but to bewitch the
reader.’
A similar result was produced by Aristotle’s doctrine of
definition. First it led to a good deal of hairsplitting. But later,
philosophers began to feel that one cannot argue about definitions.
In this way, essentialism not only encouraged verbalism, but it also
led to the disillusionment with argument, that is, with reason.
Scholasticism and mysticism and despair in reason, these are the
unavoidable results of the essentialism of Plato and Aristotle. And
Plato’s open revolt against freedom becomes, with Aristotle, a
secret revolt against reason.
As we know from Aristotle himself, essentialism and the
theory of definition met with strong opposition when they were
first proposed, especially from Socrates’ old companion
Antisthenes, whose criticism seems to have been most sensible54.
But this opposition was unfortunately defeated. The consequences

of this defeat for the intellectual development of mankind can
hardly be overrated. Some of them will be discussed in the next
chapter. With this I conclude my digression, the criticism of the
Platonic-Aristotelian theory of definition.
III
It will hardly be necessary again to stress the fact that my
treatment of Aristotle is most sketchy—much more so than my
treatment of Plato. The main purpose of what has been said about
both of them is to show the role they have played in the rise of
historicism and in the fight against the open society, and to show
their influence on problems of our own time—on the rise of the
oracular philosophy of Hegel, the father of modern historicism and
totalitarianism. The developments between Aristotle and Hegel
cannot be treated here at all. In order to do anything like justice to
them, at least another volume would be needed. In the remaining
few pages of this chapter I shall, however, attempt to indicate how
this period might be interpreted in terms of the conflict between
the open and the closed society.
The conflict between the Platonic-Aristotelian speculation and
the spirit of the Great Generation, of Pericles, of Socrates, and of
Democritus, can be traced throughout the ages. This spirit was
preserved, more or less purely, in the movement of the Cynics
who, like the early Christians, preached the brotherhood of man,
which they connected with a monotheistic belief in the fatherhood
of God. Alexander’s empire as well as that of Augustus was
influenced by these ideas which had first taken shape in the
imperialist Athens of Pericles, and which had always been
stimulated by the contact between West and East. It is very likely
that these ideas, and perhaps the Cynic movement itself, influenced
the rise of Christianity also.
In its beginning, Christianity, like the Cynic movement, was
opposed to the highbrow Platonizing Idealism and intellectualism
of the ‘scribes’, the learned men. (‘ Thou hast hid these things from
the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto the babes.’) I do
not doubt that it was, in part, a protest against what may be
described as Jewish Platonism in the wider sense55, the abstract
worship of God and His Word. And it was certainly a protest
against Jewish tribalism, against its rigid and empty tribal taboos,
and against its tribal exclusiveness which expressed itself, for
example, in the doctrine of the chosen people, i.e. in an

interpretation of the deity as a tribal god. Such an emphasis upon
tribal laws and tribal unity appears to be characteristic not so much
of a primitive tribal society as of a desperate attempt to restore and
arrest the old forms of tribal life; and in the case of Jewry, it seems
to have originated as a reaction to the impact of the Babylonian
conquest on Jewish tribal life. But side by side with this movement
towards greater rigidity we find another movement which
apparently originated at the same time, and which produced
humanitarian ideas that resembled the response of the Great
Generation to the dissolution of Greek tribalism. This process, it
appears, repeated itself when Jewish independence was ultimately
destroyed by Rome. It led to a new and deeper schism between
these two possible solutions, the return to the tribe, as represented
by orthodox Jewry, and the humanitarianism of the new sect of
Christians, which embraced barbarians (or gentiles) as well as
slaves. We can see from the Acts56 how urgent these problems
were, the social problem as well as the national problem. And we
can see this from the development of Jewry as well; for its
conservative part reacted to the same challenge by another
movement towards arresting and petrifying their tribal form of life,
and by clinging to their ‘laws’ with a tenacity which would have
won the approval of Plato. It can hardly be doubted that this
development was, like that of Plato’s ideas, inspired by a strong
antagonism to the new creed of the open society; in this case, of
Christianity.
But the parallelism between the creed of the Great Generation,
especially of Socrates, and that of early Christianity goes deeper.
There is little doubt that the strength of the early Christians lay in
their moral courage. It lay in the fact that they refused to accept
Rome’s claim ‘that it was entitled to compel its subjects to act
against their conscience’57. The Christian martyrs who rejected the
claims of might to set the standards of right suffered for the same
cause for which Socrates had died.
It is clear that these matters changed very considerably when
the Christian faith itself became powerful in the Roman empire.
The question arises whether this official recognition of the
Christian Church (and its later organization after the model of
Julian the Apostate’s Neo-Platonic Anti-Church58) was not an
ingenious political move on the part of the ruling powers, designed
to break the tremendous moral influence of an equalitarian
religion—a religion which they had in vain attempted to combat by

force as well as by accusations of atheism and impiety. In other
words, the question arises whether (especially after Julian) Rome
did not find it necessary to apply Pareto’s advice, ‘to take
advantage of sentiments, not wasting one’s energies in futile
efforts to destroy them’. This question is hard to answer; but it
certainly cannot be dismissed by appealing (as Toynbee does59) to
our ‘historical sense that warns us against attributing’, to the period
of Constantine and his followers, ‘... motives that are
anachronistically cynical’, that is to say, motives that are more in
keeping with our own ‘modern Western attitude to life’. For we
have seen that such motives are openly and ‘cynically’, or more
precisely, shamelessly, expressed as early as in the fifth century
B.C., by Critias, the leader of the Thirty Tyrants; and similar
statements can be found frequently during the history of Greek
philosophy60. However this may be, it can hardly be doubted that
with Justinian’s persecution of non-Christians, heretics, and
philosophers (A.D. 529), the dark ages began. The Church
followed in the wake of Platonic-Aristotelian totalitarianism, a
development that culminated in the Inquisition. The theory of the
Inquisition, more especially, can be described as purely Platonic. It
is set out in the last three books of the Laws, where Plato shows
that it is the duty of the shepherd rulers to protect their sheep at all
costs by preserving the rigidity of the laws and especially of
religious practice and theory, even if they have to kill the wolf,
who may admittedly be an honest and honourable man whose
diseased conscience unfortunately does not permit him to bow to
the threats of the mighty.
It is one of the characteristic reactions to the strain of
civilization in our own time that the allegedly ‘Christian’
authoritarianism of the Middle Ages has, in certain intellectualist
circles, become one of the latest fashions of the day61. This, no
doubt, is due not only to the idealization of an indeed more
‘organic’ and ‘integrated’ past, but also to an understandable
revulsion against modern agnosticism which has increased this
strain beyond measure. Men believed God to rule the world. This
belief limited their responsibility. The new belief that they had to
rule it themselves created for many a well nigh intolerable burden
of responsibility. All this has to be admitted. But I do not doubt
that the Middle Ages were, even from the point of view of
Christianity, not better ruled than our Western democracies. For
we can read in the Gospels that the founder of Christianity was

questioned by a certain ‘doctor of the law’ about a criterion by
which to distinguish between a true and a false interpretation of
His words. To this He replied by telling the parable of the priest
and the Levite who both, seeing a wounded man in great distress,’
passed by on the other side’, while the Samaritan bound up his
wounds, and looked after his material needs. This parable, I think,
should be remembered by those ‘Christians’ who long not only for
a time when the Church suppressed freedom and conscience, but
also for a time in which, under the eye and with the authority of the
Church, untold oppression drove the people to despair. As a
moving comment upon the suffering of the people in those days
and, at the same time, upon the ‘Christianity’ of the now so
fashionable romantic medievalism which wants to bring these days
back, a passage may be quoted here from H. Zinsser’s book, Rats,
Lice, and History, 62 in which he speaks about epidemics of
dancing mania in the Middle Ages, known as ‘St. John’s dance’,
‘St. Vitus’ dance’, etc. (I do not wish to invoke Zinsser as an
authority on the Middle Ages—there is no need to do so since the
facts at issue are hardly controversial. But his comments have the
rare and peculiar touch of the practical Samaritan—of a great and
humane physician.) ‘These strange seizures, though not unheard of
in earlier times, became common during and immediately after the
dreadful miseries of the Black Death. For the most part, the
dancing manias present none of the characteristics which we
associate with epidemic infectious diseases of the nervous system.
They seem, rather, like mass hysterias, brought on by terror and
despair, in populations oppressed, famished, and wretched to a
degree almost unimaginable to-day. To the miseries of constant
war, political and social disintegration, there was added the
dreadful affliction of inescapable, mysterious, and deadly disease.
Mankind stood helpless as though trapped in a world of terror and
peril against which there was no defence. God and the devil were
living conceptions to the men of those days who cowered under the
afflictions which they believed imposed by supernatural forces.
For those who broke down under the strain there was no road of
escape except to the inward refuge of mental derangement which,
under the circumstances of the times, took the direction of
religious fanaticism.’ Zinsser then goes on to draw some parallels
between these events and certain reactions of our time in which, he
says, ‘economic and political hysterias are substituted for the
religious ones of the earlier times’; and after this, he sums up his

characterization of the people who lived in those days of
authoritarianism as ‘a terror-stricken and wretched population,
which had broken down under the stress of almost incredible
hardship and danger’. Is it necessary to ask which attitude is more
Christian, one that longs to return to the ‘unbroken harmony and
unity’ of the Middle Ages, or one that wishes to use reason in order
to free mankind from pestilence and oppression?
But some part at least of the authoritarian Church of the Middle
Ages succeeded in branding such practical humanitarianism as
‘worldly’, as characteristic of ‘Epicureanism’, and of men who
desire only to ‘fill their bellies like the beasts’. The terms
‘Epicureanism’, ‘materialism’, and ‘empiricism’, that is to say, the
philosophy of Democritus, one of the greatest of the Great
Generation, became in this way the synonyms of wickedness, and
the tribal Idealism of Plato and Aristotle was exalted as a kind of
Christianity before Christ. Indeed, this is the source of the
immense authority of Plato and Aristotle, even in our own day, that
their philosophy was adopted by medieval authoritarianism. But it
must not be forgotten that, outside the totalitarian camp, their fame
has outlived their practical influence upon our lives. And although
the name of Democritus is seldom remembered, his science as well
as his morals still live with us.

Chapter 12: Hegel And The New Tribalism
The philosophy of Hegel, then, was … a scrutiny of thought so
profound that it was for the most part unintelligible ...
—J. H. STIRLING.

I
Hegel, the source of all contemporary historicism, was a direct
follower of Heraclitus, Plato, and Aristotle. Hegel achieved the
most miraculous things. A master logician, it was child’s play for
his powerful dialectical methods to draw real physical rabbits out
of purely metaphysical silk-hats. Thus, starting from Plato’s
Timaeus and its number-mysticism, Hegel succeeded in ‘proving’
by purely philosophical methods (114 years after Newton’s
Principia) that the planets must move according to Kepler’s laws.
He even accomplished1 the deduction of the actual position of the
planets, thereby proving that no planet could be situated between
Mars and Jupiter (unfortunately, it had escaped his notice that such
a planet had been discovered a few months earlier). Similarly, he

proved that magnetizing iron means increasing its weight, that
Newton’s theories of inertia and of gravity contradict each other
(of course, he could not foresee that Einstein would show the
identity of inert and gravitating mass), and many other things of
this kind. That such a surprisingly powerful philosophical method
was taken seriously can be only partially explained by the
backwardness of German natural science in those days. For the
truth is, I think, that it was not at first taken really seriously by
serious men (such as Schopenhauer, or J. F. Fries), not at any rate
by those scientists who, like Democritus2, ‘would rather find a
single causal law than be the king of Persia’. Hegel’s fame was
made by those who prefer a quick initiation into the deeper secrets
of this world to the laborious technicalities of a science which,
after all, may only disappoint them by its lack of power to unveil
all mysteries. For they soon found out that nothing could be
applied with such ease to any problem whatsoever, and at the same
time with such impressive (though only apparent) difficulty, and
with such quick and sure but imposing success, nothing could be
used as cheaply and with so little scientific training and
knowledge, and nothing would give such a spectacular scientific
air, as did Hegelian dialectics, the mystery method that replaced
‘barren formal logic’. Hegel’s success was the beginning of the
‘age of dishonesty’ (as Schopenhauer3 described the period of
German Idealism) and of the ‘age of irresponsibility’ (as K. Heiden
characterizes the age of modern totalitarianism); first of
intellectual, and later, as one of its consequences, of moral
irresponsibility; of a new age controlled by the magic of highsounding words, and by the power of jargon.
In order to discourage the reader beforehand from taking
Hegel’s bombastic and mystifying cant too seriously, I shall quote
some of the amazing details which he discovered about sound, and
especially about the relations between sound and heat. I have tried
hard to translate this gibberish from Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature4
as faithfully as possible; he writes: ‘§ 302. Sound is the change in
the specific condition of segregation of the material parts, and in
the negation of this condition;—merely an abstract or an ideal
ideality, as it were, of that specification. But this change,
accordingly, is itself immediately the negation of the material
specific subsistence; which is, therefore, real ideality of specific
gravity and cohesion, i.e.—heat. The heating up of sounding
bodies, just as of beaten or rubbed ones, is the appearance of heat,

originating conceptually together with sound.’ There are some who
still believe in Hegel’s sincerity, or who still doubt whether his
secret might not be profundity, fullness of thought, rather than
emptiness. I should like them to read carefully the last sentence—
the only intelligible one—of this quotation, because in this
sentence, Hegel gives himself away. For clearly it means nothing
but: ‘The heating up of sounding bodies .. is heat .. together with
sound.’ The question arises whether Hegel deceived himself,
hypnotized by his own inspiring jargon, or whether he boldly set
out to deceive and bewitch others. I am satisfied that the latter was
the case, especially in view of what Hegel wrote in one of his
letters. In this letter, dated a few years before the publication of his
Philosophy of Nature, Hegel referred to another Philosophy of
Nature, written by his former friend Schelling: ‘I have had too
much to do .. with mathematics .. differential calculus, chemistry’,
Hegel boasts in this letter (but this is just bluff), ‘to let myself be
taken in by the humbug of the Philosophy of Nature, by this
philosophizing without knowledge of fact .. and by the treatment of
mere fancies, even imbecile fancies, as ideas’ This is a very fair
characterization of Schelling’s method, that is to say, of that
audacious way of bluffing which Hegel himself copied, or rather
aggravated, as soon as he realized that, if it reached its proper
audience, it meant success.
In spite of all this it seems improbable that Hegel would ever
have become the most influential figure in German philosophy
without the authority of the Prussian state behind him. As it
happened, he became the first official philosopher of Prussianism,
appointed in the period of feudal ‘restoration’ after the Napoleonic
wars. Later, the state also backed his pupils (Germany had, and
still has, only state-controlled Universities), and they in their turn
backed one another. And although Hegelianism was officially
renounced by most of them, Hegelianizing philosophers have
dominated philosophical teaching and thereby indirectly even the
secondary schools of Germany ever since. (Of German-speaking
Universities, those of Roman Catholic Austria remained fairly
unmolested, like islands in a flood.) Having thus become a
tremendous success on the continent, Hegelianism could hardly
fail to obtain support in Britain from those who, feeling that such a
powerful movement must after all have something to offer, began
to search for what Stirling called The Secret of Hegel. They were
attracted, of course, by Hegel’s ‘higher’ idealism and by his claims

to ‘higher’ morality, and they were also somewhat afraid of being
branded as immoral by the chorus of the disciples; for even the
more modest Hegelians claimed5 of their doctrines that ‘they are
acquisitions which must .. ever be reconquered in the face of
assault from the powers eternally hostile to spiritual and moral
values’. Some really brilliant men (I am thinking mainly of
McTaggart) made great efforts in constructive idealistic thought,
well above the level of Hegel; but they did not get very far beyond
providing targets for equally brilliant critics. And one can say that
outside the continent of Europe, especially in the last twenty years,
the interest of philosophers in Hegel has slowly been vanishing.
But if that is so, why worry any more about Hegel? The answer
is that Hegel’s influence has remained a most powerful force, in
spite of the fact that scientists never took him seriously, and that
(apart from the ‘evolutionists’6) many philosophers are beginning
to lose interest in him. Hegel’s influence, and especially that of his
cant, is still very powerful in moral and social philosophy and in
the social and political sciences (with the sole exception of
economics). Especially the philosophers of history, of politics, and
of education are still to a very large extent under its sway. In
politics, this is shown most drastically by the fact that the Marxist
extreme left wing, as well as the conservative centre, and the
fascist extreme right, all base their political philosophies on Hegel;
the left wing replaces the war of nations which appears in Hegel’s
historicist scheme by the war of classes, the extreme right replaces
it by the war of races; but both follow him more or less
consciously. (The conservative centre is as a rule less conscious of
its indebtedness to Hegel.)
How can this immense influence be explained? My main
intention is not so much to explain this phenomenon as to combat
it. But I may make a few explanatory suggestions. For some
reason, philosophers have kept around themselves, even in our day,
something of the atmosphere of the magician. Philosophy is
considered as a strange and abstruse kind of thing, dealing with
those mysteries with which religion deals, but not in a way which
can be ‘revealed unto babes’ or to common people; it is considered
to be too profound for that, and to be the religion and theology of
the intellectuals, of the learned and wise. Hegelianism fits these
views admirably; it is exactly what this kind of popular superstition
supposes philosophy to be. It knows all about everything. It has a

ready answer to every question. And indeed, who can be sure that
the answer is not true?
But this is not the main reason for Hegel’s success. His
influence, and the need to combat it, can perhaps be better
understood if we briefly consider the general historical situation.
Medieval authoritarianism began to dissolve with the
Renaissance. But. on the Continent, its political counterpart,
medieval feudalism, was not seriously threatened before the
French Revolution. (The Reformation had only strengthened it.)
The fight for the open society began again only with the ideas of
1789; and the feudal monarchies soon experienced the seriousness
of this danger. When in 1815 the reactionary party began to resume
its power in Prussia, it found itself in dire need of an ideology.
Hegel was appointed to meet this demand, and he did so by
reviving the ideas of the first great enemies of the open society,
Heraclitus, Plato, and Aristotle. Just as the French Revolution
rediscovered the perennial ideas of the Great Generation and of
Christianity, freedom, equality, and the brotherhood of all men, so
Hegel rediscovered the Platonic ideas which lie behind the
perennial revolt against freedom and reason. Hegelianism is the
renaissance of tribalism. The historical significance of Hegel may
be seen in the fact that he represents the ‘missing link’, as it were,
between Plato and the modern form of totalitarianism. Most of the
modern totalitarians are quite unaware that their ideas can be
traced back to Plato. But many know of their indebtedness to
Hegel, and all of them have been brought up in the close
atmosphere of Hegelianism. They have been taught to worship the
state, history, and the nation. (My view of Hegel presupposes, of
course, that he interpreted Plato’s teaching in the same way as I did
here, that is to say, as totalitarian, to use this modern label; and
indeed, it can be shown7, from his criticism of Plato in the
Philosophy of Law, that Hegel’s interpretation agrees with ours.)
In order to give the reader an immediate glimpse of Hegel’s
Platonizing worship of the state, I shall quote a few passages, even
before I begin the analysis of his historicist philosophy. These
passages show that Hegel’s radical collectivism depends as much
on Plato as it depends on Frederick William III, king of Prussia in
the critical period during and after the French Revolution. Their
doctrine is that the state is everything, and the individual nothing;
for he owes everything to the state, his physical as well as his
spiritual existence. This is the message of Plato, of Frederick

William’s Prussianism, and of Hegel. ‘The Universal is to be found
in the State’, Hegel writes8. ‘The State is the Divine Idea as it
exists on earth ... We must therefore worship the State as the
manifestation of the Divine on earth, and consider that, if it is
difficult to comprehend Nature, it is infinitely harder to grasp the
Essence of the State ... The State is the march of God through the
world ... The State must be comprehended as an organism ... To the
complete State belongs, essentially, consciousness and thought.
The State knows what it wills ... The State is real; and .. true reality
is necessary. What is real is eternally necessary ... The State ..
exists for its own sake ... The State is the actually existing, realized
moral life.’ This selection of utterances may suffice to show
Hegel’s Platonism and his insistence upon the absolute moral
authority of the state, which overrules all personal morality, all
conscience. It is, of course, a bombastic and hysterical Platonism,
but this only makes more obvious the fact that it links Platonism
with modern totalitarianism.
One could ask whether by these services and by his influence
upon history, Hegel has not proved his genius. I do not think this
question very important, since it is only part of our romanticism
that we think so much in terms of ‘genius’; and apart from that, I
do not believe that success proves anything, or that history is our
judge9; these tenets are rather part of Hegelianism. But as far as
Hegel is concerned, I do not even think that he was talented. He is
an indigestible writer. As even his most ardent apologists must
admit10, his style is ‘unquestionably scandalous’. And as far as the
content of his writing is concerned, he is supreme only in his
outstanding lack of originality. There is nothing in Hegel’s writing
that has not been said better before him. There is nothing in his
apologetic method that is not borrowed from his apologetic
forerunners11. But he devoted these borrowed thoughts and
methods with singleness of purpose, though without a trace of
brilliancy, to one aim: to fight against the open society, and thus to
serve his employer, Frederick William of Prussia. Hegel’s
confusion and debasement of reason is partly necessary as a means
to this end, partly a more accidental but very natural expression of
his state of mind. And the whole story of Hegel would indeed not
be worth relating, were it not for its more sinister consequences,
which show how easily a clown may be a ‘maker of history’. The
tragicomedy of the rise of German Idealism, in spite of the hideous
crimes to which it has led, resembles a comic opera much more

than anything else; and these beginnings may help to explain why
it is so hard to decide of its latter-day heroes whether they have
escaped from the stage of Wagner’s Grand Teutonic Operas or
from Offenbach’s farces.
My assertion that Hegel’s philosophy was inspired by ulterior
motives, namely, by his interest in the restoration of the Prussian
government of Frederick William III, and that it cannot therefore
be taken seriously, is not new. The story was well known to all
who knew the political situation, and it was freely told by the few
who were independent enough to do so. The best witness is
Schopenhauer, himself a Platonic idealist and a conservative if not
a reactionary12, but a man of supreme integrity who cherished truth
beyond anything else. There can be no doubt that he was as
competent a judge in philosophical matters as could be found at the
time. Schopenhauer, who had the pleasure of knowing Hegel
personally and who suggested13 the use of Shakespeare’s words,
‘such stuff as madmen tongue and brain not’, as the motto of
Hegel’s philosophy, drew the following excellent picture of ‘the
master: ‘Hegel, installed from above, by the powers that be, as the
certified Great Philosopher, was a flat-headed, insipid, nauseating,
illiterate charlatan, who reached the pinnacle of audacity in
scribbling together and dishing up the craziest mystifying
nonsense. This nonsense has been noisily proclaimed as immortal
wisdom by mercenary followers and readily accepted as such by
all fools, who thus joined into as perfect a chorus of admiration as
had ever been heard before. The extensive field of spiritual
influence with which Hegel was furnished by those in power has
enabled him to achieve the intellectual corruption of a whole
generation.’ And in another place, Schopenhauer describes the
political game of Hegelianism as follows: ‘Philosophy, brought
afresh to repute by Kant had soon to become a tool of interests; of
state interests from above, of personal interests from below ... The
driving forces of this movement are, contrary to all these solemn
airs and assertions, not ideal; they are very real purposes indeed,
namely personal, official, clerical, political, in short, material
interests ... Party interests are vehemently agitating the pens of so
many pure lovers of wisdom ... Truth is certainly the last thing they
have in mind ... Philosophy is misused, from the side of the state as
a tool, from the other side as a means of gain ... Who can really
believe that truth also will thereby come to light, just as a byproduct? .. Governments make of philosophy a means of serving

their state interests, and scholars make of it a trade ...’
Schopenhauer’s view of Hegel’s status as the paid agent of the
Prussian government is, to mention only one example,
corroborated by Schwegler, an admiring disciple14 of Hegel.
Schwegler says of Hegel: ‘The fullness of his fame and activity,
however, properly dates only from his call to Berlin in 1818. Here
there rose up around him a numerous, widely extended, and ..
exceedingly active school; here too, he acquired, from his
connections with the Prussian bureaucracy, political influence for
himself as well as the recognition of his system as the official
philosophy; not always to the advantage of the inner freedom of
his philosophy, or of its moral worth.’ Schwegler’s editor, J. H.
Stirling15, the first British apostle of Hegelianism, of course
defends Hegel against Schwegler by warning his readers not to
take too literally ‘the little hint of Schwegler’s against .. the
philosophy of Hegel as a state-philosophy’. But a few pages later,
Stirling quite unintentionally confirms Schwegler’s representation
of the facts as well as the view that Hegel himself was aware of the
party-political and apologetic function of his philosophy. (The
evidence quoted16 by Stirling shows that Hegel expressed himself
rather cynically on this function of his philosophy.) And a little
later, Stirling unwittingly gives away the ‘secret of Hegel’ when he
proceeds to the following poetic as well as prophetic revelations17,
alluding to the lightning attack made by Prussia on Austria in
1866, the year before he wrote: ‘Is it not indeed to Hegel, and
especially his philosophy of ethics and politics, that Prussia owes
that mighty life and organization she is now rapidly developing? Is
it not indeed the grim Hegel that is the centre of that organization
which, maturing counsel in an invisible brain, strikes, lightninglike, with a hand that is weighted from the mass? But as regards
the value of this organization, it will be more palpable to many,
should I say, that, while in constitutional England, Preferenceholders and Debenture-holders are ruined by the prevailing
commercial immorality, the ordinary owners of Stock in Prussian
Railways can depend on a safe average of 8.33 per cent. This,
surely, is saying something for Hegel at last!
‘The fundamental outlines of Hegel must now, I think, be
evident to every reader. I have gained much from Hegel ..’ Stirling
continues his eulogy. I too hope that Hegel’s outlines are now
evident, and I trust that what Stirling had gained was saved from

the menace of the commercial immorality prevailing in an unHegelian and constitutional England.
(Who could resist mentioning in this context the fact that
Marxist philosophers, always ready to point out how an opponent’s
theory is affected by his class interest, habitually fail to apply this
method to Hegel? Instead of denouncing him as an apologist for
Prussian absolutism, they regret18 that the works of the originator
of dialectics, and especially his works on logic, are not more
widely read in Britain—in contrast to Russia, where the merits of
Hegel’s philosophy in general, and of his logic in particular, are
officially recognized.)
Returning to the problem of Hegel’s political motives, we
have, I think, more than sufficient reason to suspect that his
philosophy was influenced by the interests of the Prussian
government by which he was employed. But under the absolutism
of Frederick William III, such an influence implied more than
Schopenhauer or Schwegler could know; for only in the last
decades have the documents been published that show the clarity
and consistency with which this king insisted upon the complete
subordination of all learning to state interest. ‘Abstract sciences’,
we read in his educational programme19, ‘that touch only the
academic world, and serve only to enlighten this group, are of
course without value to the welfare of the State; it would be foolish
to restrict them entirely, but it is healthy to keep them within
proper limits.’ Hegel’s call to Berlin in 1818 came during the high
tide of reaction, during the period which began with the king’s
purging his government of the reformers and national liberals who
had contributed so much to his success in the ‘War of Liberation’.
Considering this fact, we may ask whether Hegel’s appointment
was not a move to ‘keep philosophy within proper limits’, so as to
enable her to be healthy and to serve ‘the welfare of the State’, that
is to say, of Frederick William and his absolute rule. The same
question is suggested to us when we read what a great admirer
says20 of Hegel: ‘And in Berlin he remained till his death in 1831,
the acknowledged dictator of one of the most powerful philosophic
schools in the history of thought.’ (I think we should substitute
‘lack of thought’ for ‘thought’, because I cannot see what a dictator
could possibly have to do with the history of thought, even if he
were a dictator of philosophy. But otherwise, this revealing
passage is only too true. For example, the concerted efforts of this
powerful school succeeded, by a conspiracy of silence, in

concealing from the world for forty years the very fact of
Schopenhauer’s existence.) We see that Hegel may indeed have
had the power to ‘keep philosophy within proper limits’, so that
our question maybe quite to the point. In what follows, I shall try
to show that Hegel’s whole philosophy can be interpreted as an
emphatic answer to this question; an answer in the affirmative, of
course. And I shall try to show how much light is thrown upon
Hegelianism if we interpret it in this way, that is to say, as an
apology for Prussianism. My analysis will be divided into three
parts, to be treated in sections II, III, and IV of this chapter.
Section II deals with Hegel’s historicism and moral positivism,
together with the rather abstruse theoretical background of these
doctrines, his dialectic method and his so-called philosophy of
identity. Section III deals with the rise of nationalism. In section
IV, a few words will be said on Hegel’s relation to Burke. And
section V deals with the dependence of modern totalitarianism
upon the doctrines of Hegel.”’
II
I begin my analysis of Hegel’s philosophy with a general
comparison between Hegel’s historicism and that of Plato. Plato
believed that the Ideas or essences exist prior to the things in flux,
and that the trend of all developments can be explained as a
movement away from the perfection of the Ideas, and therefore as
a descent, as a movement towards decay. The history of states,
especially, is one of degeneration; and ultimately this degeneration
is due to the racial degeneration of the ruling class. (We must here
remember the close relationship between the Platonic notions of
‘race’, ‘soul’, ‘nature’, and ‘essence’21.) Hegel believes, with
Aristotle, that the Ideas or essences are in the things in flux; or
more precisely (as far as we can treat a Hegel with precision),
Hegel teaches that they are identical with the things in flux:
‘Everything actual is an Idea’, he says22. But this does not mean
that the gulf opened up by Plato between the essence of a thing and
its sensible appearance is closed; for Hegel writes: ‘Any mention
of Essence implies that we distinguish it from the Being’(of the
thing);’.. upon the latter, as compared with Essence, we rather look
as mere appearance or semblance ... Everything has an Essence, we
have said; that is, things are not what they immediately show
themselves to be.’ Also like Plato and Aristotle, Hegel conceives

the essences, at least those of organisms (and therefore also those
of states), as souls, or ‘Spirits’.
But unlike Plato, Hegel does not teach that the trend of the
development of the world in flux is a descent, away from the Idea,
towards decay. Like Speusippus and Aristotle, Hegel teaches that
the general trend is rather towards the Idea; it is progress. Although
he says23, with Plato, that ‘the perishable thing has its basis in
Essence, and originates from it’, Hegel insists, in opposition to
Plato, that even the essences develop. In Hegel’s world, as in
Heraclitus’, everything is in flux; and the essences, originally
introduced by Plato in order to obtain something stable, are not
exempted. But this flux is not decay. Hegel’s historicism is
optimistic. His essences and Spirits are, like Plato’s souls, selfmoving; they are self-developing, or, using more fashionable
terms, they are ‘emerging’ and ‘self-creating’. And they propel
themselves in the direction of an Aristotelian ‘final cause’, or, as
Hegel puts it24, towards a ‘self-realizing and self-realized final
cause in itself. This final cause or end of the development of the
essences is what Hegel calls ‘The absolute Idea’ or ‘The Idea’.
(This Idea is, Hegel tells us, rather complex: it is, all in one, the
Beautiful; Cognition and Practical Activity; Comprehension; the
Highest Good; and the Scientifically Contemplated Universe. But
we really need not worry about minor difficulties such as these.)
We can say that Hegel’s world of flux is in a state of ‘emergent’ or
‘creative evolution’25; each of its stages contains the preceding
ones, from which it originates; and each stage supersedes all
previous stages, approaching nearer and nearer to perfection. The
general law of development is thus one of progress; but, as we
shall see, not of a simple and straightforward, but of a ‘dialectic’
progress.
As previous quotations have shown, the collectivist Hegel, like
Plato, visualizes the state as an organism; and following Rousseau
who had furnished it with a collective ‘general will’, Hegel
furnishes it with a conscious and thinking essence, its ‘reason’ or
‘Spirit’. This Spirit, whose ‘very essence is activity’ (which shows
its dependence on Rousseau), is at the same time the collective
Spirit of the Nation that forms the state.
To an essentialist, knowledge or understanding of the state
must clearly mean knowledge of its essence or Spirit. And as we
have seen26 in the last chapter, we can know the essence and its
‘potentialities’ only from its ‘actual’ history. Thus we arrive at the

fundamental position of historicist method, that the way of
obtaining knowledge of social institutions such as the state is to
study its history, or the history of its ‘Spirit’. And the other two
historicist consequences developed in the last chapter follow also.
The Spirit of the nation determines its hidden historical destiny;
and every nation that wishes ‘to emerge into existence’ must assert
its individuality or soul by entering the ‘Stage of History’, that is to
say, by fighting the other nations; the object of the fight is world
domination. We can see from this that Hegel, like Heraclitus,
believes that war is the father and king of all things. And like
Heraclitus, he believes that war is just: ‘The History of the World
is the World’s court of justice’, writes Hegel. And like Heraclitus,
Hegel generalizes this doctrine by extending it to the world of
nature, interpreting the contrasts and oppositions of things, the
polarity of opposites, etc., as a kind of war, and as a moving force
of natural development. And like Heraclitus, Hegel believes in the
unity or identity of opposites; indeed, the unity of opposites plays
such an important part in the evolution, in the ‘dialectical’
progress, that we can describe these two Heraclitean ideas, the war
of opposites, and their unity or identity, as the main ideas of
Hegel’s dialectics.
So far, this philosophy appears as a tolerably decent and honest
historicism, although one that is perhaps a little unoriginal27; and
there seems to be no reason to describe it, with Schopenhauer, as
charlatanism. But this appearance begins to change if we now turn
to an analysis of Hegel’s dialectics. For he proffers this method
with an eye to Kant, who, in his attack upon metaphysics (the
violence of these attacks may be gauged from the motto to my
‘Introduction’), had tried to show that all speculations of this kind
are untenable. Hegel never attempted to refute Kant. He bowed,
and twisted Kant’s view into its opposite. This is how Kant’s
‘dialectics’, the attack upon metaphysics, was converted into
Hegelian ‘dialectics’, the main tool of metaphysics.
Kant, in his Critique of Pure Reason, asserted under the
influence of Hume that pure speculation or reason, whenever it
ventures into a field in which it cannot possibly be checked by
experience, is liable to get involved in contradictions or
‘antinomies’ and to produce what he unambiguously described as
‘mere fancies’; ‘nonsense’; ‘illusions’; ‘a sterile dogmatism’; and
‘a superficial pretension to the knowledge of everything’28. He
tried to show that to every metaphysical assertion or thesis,

concerning for example the beginning of the world in time, or the
existence of God, there can be contrasted a counter-assertion or
antithesis; and both, he held, may proceed from the same
assumptions, and can be proved with an equal degree of
‘evidence’. In other words, when leaving the field of experience,
our speculation can have no scientific status, since to every
argument there must be an equally valid counter-argument. Kant’s
intention was to stop once and forever the ‘accursed fertility’ of the
scribblers on metaphysics. But unfortunately, the effect was very
different. What Kant stopped was only the attempts of the
scribblers to use rational argument; they only gave up the attempt
to teach, but not the attempt to bewitch the public (as
Schopenhauer puts it29). For this development, Kant himself
undoubtedly bears a very considerable share of the blame; for the
obscure style of his work (which he wrote in a great hurry,
although only after long years of meditation) contributed
considerably to a further lowering of the low standard of clarity in
German theoretical writing30. None of the metaphysical scribblers
who came after Kant made any attempt to refute him31; and Hegel,
more particularly, even had the audacity to patronize Kant for
‘reviving the name of Dialectics, which he restored to their post of
honour’. He taught that Kant was quite right in pointing out the
antinomies, but that he was wrong to worry about them. It just lies
in the nature of reason that it must contradict itself, Hegel asserted;
and it is not a weakness of our human faculties, but it is the very
essence of all rationality that it must work with contradictions and
antinomies; for this is just the way in which reason develops.
Hegel asserted that Kant had analysed reason as if it were
something static; that he forgot that mankind develops, and with it,
our social heritage. But what we are pleased to call our own reason
is nothing but the product of this social heritage, of the historical
development of the social group in which we live, the nation. This
development proceeds dialectically, that is to say, in a three-beat
rhythm. First a thesis is proffered; but it will produce criticism, it
will be contradicted by opponents who assert its opposite, an
antithesis; and in the conflict of these views, a synthesis is attained,
that is to say, a kind of unity of the opposites, a compromise or a
reconciliation on a higher level. The synthesis absorbs, as it were,
the two original opposite positions, by superseding them; it reduces
them to components of itself, thereby negating, elevating, and
preserving them. And once the synthesis has been established, the

whole process can repeat itself on the higher level that has now
been reached. This is, in brief, the three-beat rhythm of progress
which Hegel called the ‘dialectic triad’.
I am quite prepared to admit that this is not a bad description of
the way in which a critical discussion, and therefore also scientific
thought, may sometimes progress. For all criticism consists in
pointing out some contradictions or discrepancies, and scientific
progress consists largely in the elimination of contradictions
wherever we find them. This means, however, that science
proceeds on the assumption that contradictions are impermissible
and avoidable, so that the discovery of a contradiction forces the
scientist to make every attempt to eliminate it; and indeed, once a
contradiction is admitted, all science must collapse32. But Hegel
derives a very different lesson from his dialectic triad. Since
contradictions are the means by which science progresses, he
concludes that contradictions are not only permissible and
unavoidable but also highly desirable. This is a Hegelian doctrine
which must destroy all argument and all progress. For if
contradictions are unavoidable and desirable, there is no need to
eliminate them, and so all progress must come to an end.
But this doctrine is just one of the main tenets of Hegelianism.
Hegel’s intention is to operate freely with all contradictions. ‘All
things are contradictory in themselves’, he insists33, in order to
defend a position which means the end not only of all science, but
of all rational argument. And the reason why he wishes to admit
contradictions is that he wants to stop rational argument, and with
it scientific and intellectual progress. By making argument and
criticism impossible, he intends to make his own philosophy proof
against all criticism, so that it may establish itself as a reinforced
dogmatism, secure from every attack, and the unsurmountable
summit of all philosophical development. (We have here a first
example of a typical dialectical twist; the idea of progress, popular
in a period which leads to Darwin, but not in keeping with
conservative interests, is twisted into its opposite, that of a
development which has arrived at an end—an arrested
development.)
So much for Hegel’s dialectic triad, one of the two pillars on
which his philosophy rests. The significance of the theory will be
seen when I proceed to its application.
The other of the two pillars of Hegelianism is his so-called
philosophy of identity. It is, in its turn, an application of dialectics.

I do not intend to waste the reader’s time by attempting to make
sense of it, especially since I have tried to do so elsewhere34; for in
the main, the philosophy of identity is nothing but shameless
equivocation, and, to use Hegel’s own words, it consists of nothing
but ‘fancies, even imbecile fancies’. It is a maze in which are
caught the shadows and echoes of past philosophies, of Heraclitus,
Plato, and Aristotle, as well as of Rousseau and Kant, and in which
they now celebrate a kind of witches’ sabbath, madly trying to
confuse and beguile the naive onlooker. The leading idea, and at
the same time the link between Hegel’s dialectics and his
philosophy of identity, is Heraclitus’ doctrine of the unity of
opposites. ‘The path that leads up and the path that leads down are
identical’, Heraclitus had said, and Hegel repeats this when he
says: ‘The way west and the way east are the same.’ This
Heraclitean doctrine of the identity of opposites is applied to a host
of reminiscences from the old philosophies which are thereby
‘reduced to components’ of Hegel’s own system. Essence and
Idea, the one and the many, substance and accident, form and
content, subject and object, being and becoming, everything and
nothing, change and rest, actuality and potentiality, reality and
appearance, matter and spirit, all these ghosts from the past seem
to haunt the brain of the Great Dictator while he performs his
dance with his balloon, with his puffed-up and fictitious problems
of God and the World. But there is method in this madness, and
even Prussian method. For behind the apparent confusion there
lurk the interests of the absolute monarchy of Frederick William.
The philosophy of identity serves to justify the existing order. Its
main upshot is an ethical and juridical positivism, the doctrine that
what is, is good, since there can be no standards but existing
standards; it is the doctrine that might is right.
How is this doctrine derived? Merely by a series of
equivocations. Plato, whose Forms or Ideas, as we have seen, are
entirely different from ‘ideas in the mind’, had said that the Ideas
alone are real, and that perishable things are unreal. Hegel adopts
from this doctrine the equation Ideal = Real. Kant talked, in his
dialectics, about the ‘Ideas of pure Reason’, using the term ‘Idea’
in the sense of ‘ideas in the mind’. Hegel adopts from this the
doctrine that the Ideas are something mental or spiritual or rational,
which can be expressed in the equation Idea = Reason. Combined,
these two equations, or rather equivocations, yield Real = Reason;
and this allows Hegel to maintain that everything that is reasonable

must be real, and everything that is real must be reasonable, and
that the development of reality is the same as that of reason. And
since there can be no higher standard in existence than the latest
development of Reason and of the Idea, everything that is now real
or actual exists by necessity, and must be reasonable as well as
good35. (Particularly good, as we shall see, is the actually existing
Prussian state.)
This is the philosophy of identity. Apart from ethical
positivism a theory of truth also comes to light, just as a byproduct
(to use Schopenhauer’s words). And a very convenient theory it is.
All that is reasonable is real, we have seen. This means, of course,
that all that is reasonable must conform to reality, and therefore
must be true. Truth develops in the same way as reason develops,
and everything that appeals to reason in its latest stage of
development must also be true for that stage. In other words,
everything that seems certain to those whose reason is up to date,
must be true. Self-evidence is the same as truth. Provided you are
up to date, all you need is to believe in a doctrine; this makes it, by
definition, true. In this way, the opposition between what Hegel
calls ‘the Subjective’, i.e. belief, and ‘the Objective’, i.e. truth, is
turned into an identity; and this unity of opposites explains
scientific, knowledge also. ‘The Idea is the union of Subjective and
Objective .. Science presupposes that the separation between itself
and Truth is already cancelled.’36
So much on Hegel’s philosophy of identity, the second pillar of
wisdom on which his historicism is built. With its erection, the
somewhat tiresome work of analysing Hegel’s more abstract
doctrines comes to an end. The rest of this chapter will be confined
to the practical political applications made by Hegel of these
abstract theories. And these practical applications will show us
more clearly the apologetic purpose of all his labours. Hegel’s
dialectics, I assert, are very largely designed to pervert the ideas of
1789. Hegel was perfectly conscious of the fact that the dialectic
method can be used for twisting an idea into its opposite.
‘Dialectics’, he writes37, ‘are no novelty in philosophy. Socrates ..
used to simulate the wish for some clearer knowledge about the
subject under discussion, and after putting all sorts of questions
with that intention, he brought those with whom he conversed
round to the opposite of what their first impression had pronounced
correct.’ As a description of Socrates’ intentions, this statement of
Hegel’s is perhaps not very fair (considering that Socrates’ main

aim was the exposure of cocksureness rather than the conversion of
people to the opposite of what they believed before); but as a
statement of Hegel’s own intention, it is excellent, even though in
practice Hegel’s method turns out to be more clumsy than his
programme indicates. As a first example of this use of dialectics, I
shall select the problem of freedom of thought, of the independence
of science, and of the standards of objective truth, as treated by
Hegel in the Philosophy of Law (§ 270). He begins with what can
only be interpreted as a demand for freedom of thought, and for its
protection by the state: ‘The state’, he writes,’ has .. thought as its
essential principle. Thus freedom of thought, and science, can
originate only in the state; it was the church that burnt Giordano
Bruno, and forced Galileo to recant ... Science, therefore, must
seek protection from the state, since .. the aim of science is
knowledge of objective truth.’ After this promising start which we
may take as representing the ‘first impressions’ of his opponents,
Hegel proceeds to bring them ‘to the opposite of what their first
impressions pronounced correct’, covering his change of front by
another sham attack on the Church: ‘But such knowledge does, of
course, not always conform with the standards of science, it may
degenerate into mere opinion and for these opinions .. it’ (i.e.
science) ‘may raise the same pretentious demand as the church—
the demand to be free in its opinions and convictions.’ Thus the
demand for freedom of thought, and of the claim of science to
judge for itself, is described as ‘pretentious’; but this is merely the
first step in Hegel’s twist. We next hear that, if faced with
subversive opinions, ‘the state must protect objective truth’; which
raises the fundamental question: who is to judge what is, and what
is not, objective truth? Hegel replies: ‘The state has, in general, ..
to make up its own mind concerning what is to be considered as
objective truth.’ With this reply, freedom of thought, and the
claims of science to set its own standards, give way, finally, to
their opposites.
As a second example of this use of dialectics, I select Hegel’s
treatment of the demand for a political constitution, which he
combines with his treatment of equality and liberty. In order to
appreciate the problem of the constitution, it must be remembered
that Prussian absolutism knew no constitutional law (apart from
such principles as the full sovereignty of the king) and that the
slogan of the campaign for democratic reform in the various
German principalities was that the prince should ‘grant the country

a constitution’. But Frederick William agreed with his councillor
Ancillon in the conviction that he must never give way to ‘the
hotheads, that very active and loud-voiced group of persons who
for some years have set themselves up as the nation and have cried
for a constitution’38. And although, under great pressure, the king
promised a constitution, he never fulfilled his word. (There is a
story that an innocent comment on the king’s ‘constitution’ led to
the dismissal of his unfortunate court-physician.) Now how does
Hegel treat this ticklish problem? ‘As a living mind’, he writes,
‘the state is an organized whole, articulated into various agencies
... The constitution is this articulation or organization of state
power ... The constitution is existent justice ... Liberty and equality
are .. the final aims and results of the constitution.’ This, of course,
is only the introduction. But before proceeding to the dialectical
transformation of the demand for a constitution into one for an
absolute monarchy, we must first show how Hegel transforms the
two ‘aims and results’, liberty and equality, into their opposites.
Let us first see how Hegel twists equality into inequality: ‘That
the citizens are equal before the law’, Hegel admits39, ‘contains a
great truth. But expressed in this way, it is only a tautology; it only
states in general that a legal status exists, that the laws rule. But to
be more concrete, the citizens .. are equal before the law only in
the points in which they are equal outside the law also. Only that
equality which they possess in property, age, .. etc., can deserve
equal treatment before the law .. The laws themselves ..
presuppose unequal conditions ... It should be said that it is just the
great development and maturity of form in modern states which
produces the supreme concrete inequality of individuals in
actuality.’
In this outline of Hegel’s twist of the ‘great truth’ of
equalitarianism into its opposite, I have radically abbreviated his
argument; and I must warn the reader that I shall have to do the
same throughout the chapter; for only in this way is it at all
possible to present, in a readable manner, his verbosity and the
flight of his thoughts (which, I do not doubt, is pathological40). We
may consider liberty next. ‘As regards liberty’, Hegel writes, ‘in
former times, the legally defined rights, the private as well as
public rights of a city, etc., were called its “liberties”. Really, every
genuine law is a liberty; for it contains a reasonable principle ..;
which means, in other words, that it embodies a liberty ...’ Now
this argument which tries to show that ‘liberty’ is the same as ‘a

liberty’ and therefore the same as ‘law’, from which it follows that
the more laws, the more liberty, is clearly nothing but a clumsy
statement (clumsy because it relies on a kind of pun) of the
paradox of freedom, first discovered by Plato, and briefly
discussed above41; a paradox that can be expressed by saying that
unlimited freedom leads to its opposite, since without its protection
and restriction by law, freedom must lead to a tyranny of the strong
over the weak. This paradox, vaguely restated by Rousseau, was
solved by Kant, who demanded that the freedom of each man
should be restricted, but not beyond what is necessary to safeguard
an equal degree of freedom for all. Hegel of course knows Kant’s
solution, but he does not like it, and he presents it, without
mentioning its author, in the following disparaging way: ‘To-day,
nothing is more familiar than the idea that each must restrict his
liberty in relation to the liberty of others; that the state is a
condition of such reciprocal restrictions; and that the laws are
restrictions. But’, he goes on to criticize Kant’s theory, this
expresses the kind of outlook that views freedom as casual goodpleasure and self-will.’ With this cryptic remark, Kant’s
equalitarian theory of justice is dismissed. But Hegel himself feels
that the little jest by which he equates liberty and law is not quite
sufficient for his purpose; and somewhat hesitatingly he turns back
to his original problem, that of the constitution. ‘The term political
liberty’, he says42,’ is often used to mean a formal participation in
the public affairs of the state by .. those who otherwise find their
chief function in the particular aims and business of civil society’
(in other words, by the ordinary citizen). ‘And it has .. become a
custom to give the title “constitution” only to that side of the state
which establishes such participation .. , and to regard a state in
which this is not formally done as a state without a constitution.’
Indeed, this has become a custom. But how to get out of it? By a
merely verbal trick—by a definition: ‘About this use of the term,
the only thing to say is that by a constitution we must understand
the determination of laws in general, that is to say, of liberties ..’
But again, Hegel himself feels the appalling poverty of the
argument, and in despair he dives into a collectivist mysticism (of
Rousseau’s making) and into historicism43: ‘The question “To
whom .. belongs the power of making a constitution?” is the same
as “Who has to make the Spirit of a Nation?”. Separate your idea
of a constitution’, Hegel exclaims, ‘from that of a collective Spirit,
as if the latter exists, or has existed, without a constitution, and

your fancy proves how superficially you have apprehended the
nexus’ (namely, that between the Spirit and the constitution).’.. It
is the indwelling Spirit and the history of the Nation—which only
is that Spirit’s history—by which constitutions have been and are
made.’ But this mysticism is still too vague to justify absolutism.
One must be more specific; and Hegel now hastens to be so: ‘The
really living totality,’ he writes, ‘that which preserves, and
continually produces, the State and its constitution, is the
Government ... In the Government, regarded as an organic totality,
the Sovereign Power or Principate is .. the all-sustaining, alldecreeing Will of the State, its highest Peak and all-pervasive
Unity. In the perfect form of the State in which each and every
element .. has reached its free existence, this will is that of one
actual decreeing Individual (not merely of a majority in which the
unity of the decreeing will has no actual existence); it is monarchy.
The monarchical constitution is therefore the constitution of
developed reason; and all other constitutions belong to lower
grades of the development and the self-realization of reason.’ And
to be still more specific, Hegel explains in a parallel passage of his
Philosophy of Law—the foregoing quotations are all taken from
his Encyclopedia—that ‘ultimate decision .. absolute selfdetermination constitutes the power of the prince as such’, and that
‘the absolutely decisive element in the whole .. is a single
individual, the monarch.’
Now we have it. How can anybody be so stupid as to demand a
‘constitution’ for a country that is blessed with an absolute
monarchy, the highest possible grade of all constitutions anyway?
Those who make such demands obviously know not what they do
and what they are talking about, just as those who demand freedom
are too blind to see that in the Prussian absolute monarchy, ‘each
and every element has reached its free existence’. In other words,
we have here Hegel’s absolute dialectical proof that Prussia is the
‘highest peak’, and the very stronghold, of freedom; that its
absolutist constitution is the goal (not as some might think, the
gaol) towards which humanity moves; and that its government
preserves and keeps, as it were, the purest spirit of freedom—in
concentration.
Plato’s philosophy, which once had claimed mastership in the
state, becomes with Hegel its most servile lackey.
These despicable services44, it is important to note, were
rendered voluntarily. There was no totalitarian intimidation in

those happy days of absolute monarchy; nor was the censorship
very effective, as countless liberal publications show. When Hegel
published his Encyclopedia he was professor in Heidelberg. And
immediately after the publication, he was called to Berlin to
become, as his admirers say, the ‘acknowledged dictator’ of
philosophy. But, some may contend, all this, even if it is true, does
not prove anything against the excellence of Hegel’s dialectic
philosophy, or against his greatness as a philosopher. To this
contention, Schopenhauer’s reply has already been given:
‘Philosophy is misused, from the side of the state as a tool, from
the other side as a means of gain. Who can really believe that truth
also will thereby come to light, just as a by-product?’
These passages give us a glimpse of the way in which Hegel’s
dialectic method is applied in practice. I now proceed to the
combined application of dialectics and the philosophy of identity.
Hegel, we have seen, teaches that everything is in flux, even
essences. Essences and Ideas and Spirits develop; and their
development is, of course, self-moving and dialectical45. And the
latest stage of every development must be reasonable, and
therefore good and true, for it is the apex of all past developments
superseding all previous stages. (Thus things can only get better
and better.) Every real development, since it is a real process must,
according to the philosophy of identity, be a rational and
reasonable process. It is clear that this must hold for history also.
Heraclitus had maintained that there is a hidden reason in
history. For Hegel, history becomes an open book. The book is
pure apologetics. By its appeal to the wisdom of Providence it
offers an apology for the excellence of Prussian monarchism; by its
appeal to the excellence of Prussian monarchism it offers an
apology for the wisdom of Providence.
History is the development of something real. According to the
philosophy of identity, it must therefore be something rational. The
evolution of the real world, of which history is the most important
part, is taken by Hegel to be ‘identical’ with a kind of logical
operation, or with a process of reasoning. History, as he sees it, is
the thought process of the ‘Absolute Spirit’ or ‘World Spirit’. It is
the manifestation of this Spirit. It is a kind of huge dialectical
syllogism46; reasoned out, as it were, by Providence. The syllogism
is the plan which Providence follows; and the logical conclusion
arrived at is the end which Providence pursues—the perfection of
the world. ‘The only thought’, Hegel writes in his Philosophy of

History, ‘with which Philosophy approaches History, is the simple
conception of Reason; it is the doctrine that Reason is the
Sovereign of the World, and that the History of the World,
therefore, presents us with a rational process. This conviction and
intuition is .. no hypothesis in the domain of Philosophy. It is there
proven .. that Reason .. is Substance; as well as Infinite Power; ..
Infinite Matter ..; Infinite Form ..; Infinite Energy ... That this
“Idea” or “Reason” is the True, the Eternal, the absolutely
Powerful Essence; that it reveals itself in the World, and that in
that World nothing else is revealed but this and its honour and
glory—this is a thesis which, as we have said, has been proved in
Philosophy, and is here regarded as demonstrated.’ This gush does
not carry us far. But if we look up the passage in ‘Philosophy’ (i.e.,
in his Encyclopedia) to which Hegel refers, then we see a little
more of his apologetic purpose. For here we read: ‘That History,
and above all Universal History, is founded on an essential and
actual aim, which actually is, and will be, realized in it—the Plan
of Providence; that, in short, there is Reason in History, must be
decided on strictly philosophical grounds, and thus shown to be
essential and in fact necessary.’ Now since the aim of Providence
‘actually is realized’ in the results of history, it might be suspected
that this realization has taken place in the actual Prussia. And so it
has; we are even shown how this aim is reached, in three
dialectical steps of the historical development of reason, or, as
Hegel says, of ‘Spirit’, whose ‘life .. is a cycle of progressive
embodiments’47. The first of these steps is Oriental despotism, the
second is formed by the Greek and Roman democracies and
aristocracies, and the third, and highest, is the Germanic
Monarchy, which of course is an absolute monarchy. And Hegel
makes it quite clear that he does not mean a Utopian monarchy of
the future: ‘Spirit .. has no past, no future,’ he writes, ‘but is
essentially now; this necessarily implies that the present form of
the Spirit contains and surpasses all earlier steps.’
But Hegel can be even more outspoken than that. He
subdivided the third period of history, Germanic Monarchy, or ‘the
German World’, into three divisions too, of which he says48: ‘First,
we have to consider Reformation in itself—the all-enlightening
Sun, following on that blush of dawn which we observed at the
termination of the medieval period; next, the unfolding of that state
of things which succeeded the Reformation; and lastly, Modern
Times, dating from the end of the last century’, i.e. the period from

1800 down to 1830 (the last year in which these lectures were
delivered). And Hegel proves again that this present Prussia is the
pinnacle and the stronghold and the goal of freedom. ‘On the Stage
of Universal History’, Hegel writes ‘on which we can observe and
grasp it, Spirit displays itself in its most concrete reality.’ And the
essence of Spirit, Hegel teaches, is freedom. ‘Freedom is the sole
truth of Spirit.’ Accordingly, the development of Spirit must be the
development of freedom, and the highest freedom must have been
achieved in those thirty years of the Germanic Monarchy which
represent the last subdivision of historical development. And
indeed, we read49: ‘The German Spirit is the Spirit of the new
World. Its aim is the realization of absolute Truth as the unlimited
self-determination of Freedom.’ And after a eulogy of Prussia, the
government of which, Hegel assures us, ‘rests with the official
world, whose apex is the personal decision of the Monarch; for a
final decision is, as shown above, an absolute necessity’, Hegel
reaches the crowning conclusion of his work: ‘This is the point’, he
says, ‘which consciousness has attained, and these are the principal
phases of that form in which Freedom has realized itself; for the
History of the World is nothing but the development of the Idea of
Freedom ... That the History of the World .. is the realization of
Spirit, this is the true Theodicy, the justification of God in History
... What has happened and is happening .. is essentially His Work
..’
I ask whether I was not justified when I said that Hegel
presents us with an apology for God and for Prussia at the same
time, and whether it is not clear that the state which Hegel
commands us to worship as the Divine Idea on earth is not simply
Frederick William’s Prussia from 1800 to 1830. And I ask whether
it is possible to outdo this despicable perversion of everything that
is decent; a perversion not only of reason, freedom, equality, and
the other ideas of the open society, but also of a sincere belief in
God, and even of a sincere patriotism.
I have described how, starting from a point that appears to be
progressive and even revolutionary, and proceeding by that general
dialectical method of twisting things which by now will be familiar
to the reader, Hegel finally reaches a surprisingly conservative
result. At the same time, he connects his philosophy of history with
his ethical and juridical positivism, giving the latter a kind of
historicist justification. History is our judge. Since History and

Providence have brought the existing powers into being, their
might must be right, even Divine right.
But this moral positivism does not fully satisfy Hegel. He
wants more. Just as he opposes liberty and equality, so he opposes
the brotherhood of man, humanitarianism, or, as he says,
‘philanthropy’. Conscience must be replaced by blind obedience
and by a romantic Heraclitean ethics of fame and fate, and the
brotherhood of man by a totalitarian nationalism. How this is done
will be shown in section III and especially50 in section IV of this
chapter.
III
I now proceed to a very brief sketch of a rather strange story—
the story of the rise of German nationalism. Undoubtedly the
tendencies denoted by this term have a strong affinity with the
revolt against reason and the open society. Nationalism appeals to
our tribal instincts, to passion and to prejudice, and to our nostalgic
desire to be relieved from the strain of individual responsibility
which it attempts to replace by a collective or group responsibility.
It is in keeping with these tendencies that we find that the oldest
works on political theory, even that of the Old Oligarch, but more
markedly those of Plato and of Aristotle, express decidedly
nationalist views; for these works were written in an attempt to
combat the open society and the new ideas of imperialism,
cosmopolitanism, and equalitarianism51. But this early
development of a nationalist political theory stops short with
Aristotle. With Alexander’s empire, genuine tribal nationalism
disappears for ever from political practice, and for a long time
from political theory. From Alexander onward, all the civilized
states of Europe and Asia were empires, embracing populations of
infinitely mixed origin. European civilization and all the political
units belonging to it have remained international or, more
precisely, inter-tribal ever since. (It seems that about as long before
Alexander as Alexander was before us, the empire of ancient
Sumer had created the first international civilization.) And what
holds good of political practice holds good of political theory; until
about a hundred years ago, the Platonic-Aristotelian nationalism
had practically disappeared from political doctrines. (Of course,
tribal and parochial feelings were always strong.) When
nationalism was revived a hundred years ago, it was in one of the
most mixed of all the thoroughly mixed regions of Europe, in

Germany, and especially in Prussia with its largely Slav
population. (It is not well known that barely a century ago, Prussia,
with its then predominantly Slav population, was not considered a
German state at all; though its kings, who as princes of
Brandenburg were ‘Electors’ of the German Empire, were
considered German princes. At the Congress of Vienna, Prussia
was registered as a ‘Slav kingdom’; and in 1830 Hegel still spoke52
even of Brandenburg and Mecklenburg as being populated by
‘Germanized Slavs’.)
Thus it is only a short time since the principle of the national
state was reintroduced into political theory. In spite of this fact, it
is so widely accepted in our day that it is usually taken for granted,
and very often unconsciously so. It now forms, as it were, an
implicit assumption of popular political thought. It is even
considered by many to be the basic postulate of political ethics,
especially since Wilson’s well-meant but less well-considered
principle of national self-determination. How anybody who had the
slightest knowledge of European history, of the shifting and
mixing of all kinds of tribes, of the countless waves of peoples
who had come forth from their original Asian habitat and split up
and mingled when reaching the maze of peninsulas called the
European continent, how anybody who knew this could ever have
put forward such an inapplicable principle, is hard to understand.
The explanation is that Wilson, who was a sincere democrat (and
Masaryk also, one of the greatest of all fighters for the open
society53), fell a victim to a movement that sprang from the most
reactionary and servile political philosophy that had ever been
imposed upon meek and long-suffering mankind. He fell a victim
to his upbringing in the metaphysical political theories of Plato and
of Hegel, and to the nationalist movement based upon them.
The principle of the national state, that is to say, the political
demand that the territory of every state should coincide with the
territory inhabited by one nation, is by no means so self-evident as
it seems to appear to many people to-day. Even if anyone knew
what he meant when he spoke of nationality, it would be not at all
clear why nationality should be accepted as a fundamental political
category, more important for instance than religion, or birth within
a certain geographical region, or loyalty to a dynasty, or a political
creed like democracy (which forms, one might say, the uniting
factor of multi-lingual Switzerland). But while religion, territory,
or a political creed can be more or less clearly determined, nobody

has ever been able to explain what he means by a nation, in a way
that could be used as a basis for practical politics. (Of course, if we
say that a nation is a number of people who live or have been born
in a certain state, then everything is clear; but this would mean
giving up the principle of the national state which demands that the
state should be determined by the nation, and not the other way
round.) None of the theories which maintain that a nation is united
by a common origin, or a common language, or a common history,
is acceptable, or applicable in practice. The principle of the
national state is not only inapplicable but it has never been clearly
conceived. It is a myth. It is an irrational, a romantic and Utopian
dream, a dream of naturalism and of tribal collectivism.
In spite of its inherent reactionary and irrational tendencies,
modern nationalism, strangely enough, was in its short history
before Hegel a revolutionary and liberal creed. By something like
an historical accident—the invasion of German lands by the first
national army, the French army under Napoleon, and the reaction
caused by this event—it had made its way into the camp of
freedom. It is not without interest to sketch the history of this
development, and of the way in which Hegel brought nationalism
back into the totalitarian camp where it had belonged from the time
when Plato first maintained that Greeks are related to barbarians
like masters to slaves.
Plato, it will be remembered54, unfortunately formulated his
fundamental political problem by asking: Who should rule? Whose
will should be law? Before Rousseau, the usual answer to this
question was: The prince. Rousseau gave a new and most
revolutionary answer. Not the prince, he maintained, but the people
should rule; not the will of one man but the will of all. In this way,
he was led to invent the people’s will, the collective will, or the
‘general will’, as he called it; and the people, once endowed with a
will, had to be exalted into a super-personality; ‘in relation to what
is external to it’ (i.e. in relation to other peoples), Rousseau says,
‘it becomes one single being, one individual’. There was a good
deal of romantic collectivism in this invention, but no tendency
towards nationalism. But Rousseau’s theories clearly contained the
germ of nationalism, whose most characteristic doctrine is that the
various nations must be conceived as personalities. And a great
practical step in the nationalist direction was made when the
French Revolution inaugurated a people’s army, based on national
conscription.

One of the next to contribute to the theory of nationalism was
J. G. Herder, a former pupil and at the time a personal friend of
Kant. Herder maintained that a good state should have natural
borders, namely those which coincide with the places inhabited by
its ‘nation’; a theory which he first proffered in his Ideas towards a
Philosophy of the History of Mankind (1785). ‘The most natural
state’, he wrote55, ‘is a state composed of a single people with a
single national character ... A people is a natural growth like a
family, only spread more widely ... As in all human communities,
.. so, in the case of the state, the natural order is the best—that is to
say, the order in which everyone fulfils that function for which
nature intended him.’ This theory, which tries to give an answer to
the problem of the ‘natural’ borders of the state56, an answer that
only raises the new problem of the ‘natural’ borders of the nation,
did not at first exert much influence. It is interesting to see that
Kant at once realized the dangerous irrational romanticism in this
work of Herder’s, of whom he made a sworn enemy by his
outspoken criticism. I shall quote a passage from this criticism,
because it excellently sums up, once and for all, not only Herder,
but also the later oracular philosophers like Fichte, Schelling,
Hegel, together with all their modern followers: ‘A sagacity quick
in picking up analogies’, Kant wrote, ‘and an imagination
audacious in the use it makes of them are combined with a
capability for enlisting emotions and passions in order to obtain
interest for its object—an object that is always veiled in mystery.
These emotions are easily mistaken for the efforts of powerful and
profound thoughts or at least of deeply significant allusions; and
they thus arouse higher expectations than cool judgement would
find justified . Synonyms are passed off as explanations, and
allegories are offered as truths.’
It was Fichte who provided German nationalism with its first
theory. The borders of a nation, he contended, are determined by
language. (This does not improve matters. Where do differences of
dialect become differences of language? How many different
languages do the Slavs or the Teutons speak, or are the differences
merely dialects?)
Fichte’s opinions had a most curious development, especially if
we consider that he was one of the founders of German
nationalism. In 1793, he defended Rousseau and the French
Revolution, and in 1799 he still declared57: ‘It is plain that from
now on the French Republic alone can be the fatherland of the

upright man, that he can devote his powers to this country alone of
all, since not only the dearest hopes of humanity but also its very
existence are bound up with the victory of France ... I dedicate
myself and all my abilities to the Republic.’ It may be noted that
when Fichte made these remarks he was negotiating for a
university position in Mainz, a place then controlled by the French.
‘In 1804’, E. N. Anderson writes in his interesting study on
nationalism, ‘Fichte .. was eager to leave Prussian service and to
accept a call from Russia. The Prussian government had not
appreciated him to the desired financial extent and he hoped for
more recognition from Russia, writing to the Russian negotiator
that if the government would make him a member of the St.
Petersburg Academy of Science and pay him a salary of not less
than four hundred roubles, “I would be theirs until death” .. Two
years later’, Anderson continues, ‘the transformation of Fichte the
cosmopolitan into Fichte the nationalist was completed.’
When Berlin was occupied by the French, Fichte left, out of
patriotism; an act which, as Anderson says ‘he did not allow .. to
remain unnoticed by the Prussian king and government’. When A.
Mueller and W. von Humboldt had been received by Napoleon,
Fichte wrote indignantly to his wife: ‘I do not envy Mueller and
Humboldt; I am glad that I did not obtain that shameful honour . .
It makes a difference to one’s conscience and apparently also to
ones later success if . . one has openly shown devotion to the good
cause.’ On this, Anderson comments: ‘As a matter of fact, he did
profit; undoubtedly his call to the University of Berlin resulted
from this episode. This does not detract from the patriotism of his
act, but merely places it in its proper light.’ To all this we must add
that Fichte’s career as a philosopher was from the beginning based
on a fraud. His first book was published anonymously, when
Kant’s philosophy of religion was expected, under the title
Critique of All Revelation. It was an extremely dull book, which
did not prevent it from being a clever copy of Kant’s style; and
everything was set in motion, including rumours, to make people
believe that it was Kant’s work. The matter appears in its right
light if we realize that Fichte only obtained a publisher through the
kindheartedness of Kant (who was never able to read more than the
first few pages of the book). When the press extolled Fichte’s work
as one of Kant’s, Kant was forced to make a public statement that
the work was Fichte’s, and Fichte, upon whom fame had suddenly
descended, was made professor in Jena. But Kant was later forced

to make another declaration, in order to dissociate himself from
this man, a declaration in which occur the words58: ‘May God
protect us from our friends. From our enemies, we can try to
protect ourselves.’
These arc a few episodes in the career of the man whose
‘windbaggery’ has given rise to modern nationalism as well as to
modern Idealist philosophy, erected upon the perversion of Kant’s
teaching. (I follow Schopenhauer in distinguishing between
Fichte’s ‘windbaggery’ and Hegel’s ‘charlatanry’, although I must
admit that to insist on this distinction is perhaps a little pedantic.)
The whole story is interesting mainly because of the light it throws
upon the ‘history of philosophy’ and upon ‘history’ in general. I
mean not only the perhaps more humorous than scandalous fact
that such clowns are taken seriously, and that they are made the
objects of a kind of worship, of solemn although often boring
studies (and of examination papers to match). I mean not only the
appalling fact that the windbag Fichte and the charlatan Hegel are
treated on a level with men like Democritus, Pascal, Descartes,
Spinoza, Locke, Hume, Kant, J. S. Mill, and Bertrand Russell, and
that their moral teaching is taken seriously and perhaps even
considered superior to that of these other men But I mean that
many of these eulogist historians of philosophy unable to
discriminate between thought and fancy, not to mention good and
bad, dare to pronounce that their history is our judge, or that their
history of philosophy is an implicit criticism of the different’
systems of thought’. For it is clear, I think, that their adulation can
only be an implicit criticism of their histories of philosophy, and of
that pomposity and conspiracy of noise by which the business of
philosophy is glorified. It seems to be a law of what these people
are pleased to call ‘human nature’ that bumptiousness grows in
direct proportion to deficiency of thought and inversely to the
amount of service rendered to human welfare.
At the time when Fichte became the apostle of nationalism, an
instinctive and revolutionary nationalism was rising in Germany as
a reaction to the Napoleonic invasion. (It was one of those typical
tribal reactions against the expansion of a super-national empire.)
The people demanded democratic reforms which they understood
in the sense of Rousseau and of the French Revolution, but which
they wanted without their French conquerors. They turned against
their own princes and against the emperor at the same time. This
early nationalism arose with the force of a new religion, as a kind

of cloak in which a humanitarian desire for freedom and equality
was clad. ‘Nationalism’, Anderson writes59, ‘grew as orthodox
Christianity declined, replacing the latter with belief in a mystical
experience of its own.’ It is the mystical experience of community
with the other members of the oppressed tribe, an experience
which replaced not only Christianity but especially the feeling of
trust and loyalty to the king which the abuses of absolutism had
destroyed. It is clear that such an untamed new and democratic
religion was a source of great irritation, and even of danger, to the
ruling class, and especially to the king of Prussia. How was this
danger to be met? After the wars of liberation, Frederick William
met it first by dismissing his nationalist advisers, and then by
appointing Hegel. For the French Revolution had proved the
influence of philosophy, a point duly emphasized by Hegel (since
it is the basis of his own services): ‘The Spiritual’, he says60, ‘is
now the essential basis of the potential fabric, and Philosophy has
thereby become dominant. It has been said that the French
Revolution resulted from Philosophy, and it is not without reason
that Philosophy has been described as World Wisdom; Philosophy
is not only Truth in and for itself .. but also Truth as exhibited in
worldly matters. We should not, therefore, contradict the assertion
that the Revolution received its first impulse from Philosophy.’
This is an indication of Hegel’s insight into his immediate task, to
give a counter impulse; an impulse, though not the first, by which
philosophy might strengthen the forces of reaction. Part of this task
was the perversion of the ideas of freedom, equality, etc. But
perhaps an even more urgent task was the taming of the
revolutionary nationalist religion. Hegel fulfilled this task in the
spirit of Pareto’s advice ‘to take advantage of sentiments, not
wasting one’s energies in futile efforts to destroy them’. He tamed
nationalism not by outspoken opposition but by transforming it
into a well-disciplined Prussian authoritarianism. And it so
happened that he brought back a powerful weapon into the camp of
the closed society, where it fundamentally belonged.
All this was done rather clumsily. Hegel, in his desire to please
the government, sometimes attacked the nationalists much too
openly. ‘Some men’, he wrote61 in the Philosophy of Law, ‘have
recently begun to talk of the “sovereignty of the people” in
opposition to the sovereignty of the monarch. But when it is
contrasted with the sovereignty of the monarch, then the phrase
“sovereignty of the people” turns out to be merely one of those

confused notions which arise from a wild idea of the “people”.
Without its monarch .. the people are just a formless multitude.’
Earlier, in the Encyclopedia, he wrote: ‘The aggregate of private
persons is often spoken of as the nation. But such an aggregate is a
rabble, not a people; and with regard to it, it is the one aim of the
state that a nation should not come into existence, to power and
action, as such an aggregate. Such a condition of a nation is a
condition of lawlessness, demoralization, brutishness. In it, the
nation would only be a shapeless wild blind force, like that of a
stormy elemental sea, which however is not self-destructive, as the
nation—a spiritual element—would be. Yet one can often hear
such a condition described as pure freedom.’ There is here an
unmistakable allusion to the liberal nationalists, whom the king
hated like the plague. And this is even clearer when we see Hegel’s
reference to the early nationalists’ dreams of rebuilding the
German empire: ‘The fiction of an Empire’, he says in his eulogy
of the latest developments in Prussia, ‘has utterly vanished. It is
broken into Sovereign States.’ His anti-liberal tendencies induced
Hegel to refer to England as the most characteristic example of a
nation in the bad sense ‘Take the case of England.’ he writes,
‘which, because private person’ have a predominant share in public
affairs, has been regarded as having the freest of all constitutions.
Experience shows that that country, as compared with the other
civilized states of Europe, is the most backward in civil and
criminal legislation, in the law and liberty of property, and in
arrangements for the arts and sciences, and that objective freedom
or rational right is sacrificed to formal62 right and particular private
interest: and that this happens even in the institutions and
possessions dedicated to religion.’ An astonishing statement
indeed, especially when the ‘arts and sciences’ are considered, for
nothing could have been more backward than Prussia, where the
University of Berlin had been founded only under the influence of
the Napoleonic wars, and with the idea, as the king said63, that ‘the
state must replace with intellectual prowess what it has lost in
physical strength’. A few pages later, Hegel forgets what he has
said about the arts and sciences in England; for he speaks there of
‘England, where the art of historical writing has undergone a
process of purification and arrived at a firmer and more mature
character’.
We see that Hegel knew that his task was to combat the liberal
and even the imperialist leanings of nationalism. He did it by

persuading the nationalists that their collectivist demands are
automatically realized by an almighty state, and that all they need
do is to help to strengthen the power of the state. ‘The Nation State
is Spirit in its substantive rationality and immediate actuality’, he
writes64; ‘it is therefore the absolute power on earth ... The state is
the Spirit of the People itself. The actual State is animated by this
spirit, in all its particular affairs, its Wars, and its Institutions ...
The self-consciousness of one particular Nation is the vehicle for
the .. development of the collective spirit; .. in it, the Spirit of the
Time invests its Will. Against this Will, the other national minds
have no rights: that Nation dominates the World.’ It is thus the
nation and its spirit and its will that act on the stage of history.
History is the contest of the various national spirits for world
domination. From this it follows that the reforms advocated by the
liberal nationalists are unnecessary, since the nation and its spirit
are the leading actors anyway; besides, ‘every nation .. has the
constitution which is appropriate to it and belongs to it’. (Juridical
positivism.) We see that Hegel replaces the liberal elements in
nationalism not only by a Platonic-Prussianist worship of the state,
but also by a worship of history, of historical success. (Frederick
William had been successful against Napoleon.) In this way, Hegel
not only began a new chapter in the history of nationalism, but he
also provided nationalism with a new theory. Fichte, we have seen,
had provided it with the theory that it was based on language.
Hegel introduced the historical theory of the nation. A nation,
according to Hegel, is united by a spirit that acts in history. It is
united by the common foe, and by the comradeship of the wars it
has fought. (It has been said that a race is a collection of men
united not by their origin but by a common error in regard to their
origin. In a similar way, we could say that a nation in Hegel’s
sense is a number of men united by a common error in regard to
their history.) It is clear how this theory is connected with Hegel’s
historicist essentialism. The history of a nation is the history of its
essence or ‘Spirit’, asserting itself on the ‘Stage of History’.
In concluding this sketch of the rise of nationalism, I may make
a remark on the events down to the foundation of Bismarck’s
German empire. Hegel’s policy had been to take advantage of
nationalist sentiments, instead of wasting energy in futile efforts to
destroy them. But sometimes this celebrated technique appears to
have rather strange consequences. The medieval conversion of
Christianity into an authoritarian creed could not fully suppress its

humanitarian tendencies; again and again, Christianity breaks
through the authoritarian cloak (and is persecuted as heresy). In
this way, Pareto’s advice not only serves to neutralize tendencies
that endanger the ruling class, but can also unintentionally help to
preserve these very tendencies. A similar thing happened to
nationalism. Hegel had tamed it, and had tried to replace German
nationalism by a Prussian nationalism. But by thus ‘reducing
nationalism to a component’ of his Prussianism (to use his own
jargon) Hegel ‘preserved’ it; and Prussia found itself forced to
proceed on the way of taking advantage of the sentiments of
German nationalism. When it fought Austria in 1866 it had to do
so in the name of German nationalism, and under the pretext of
securing the leadership of ‘Germany’. And it had to advertise the
vastly enlarged Prussia of 1871 as the new ‘German Empire’, a
new ‘German Nation’—welded by war into a unit, in accordance
with Hegel’s historical theory of the nation.
IV
In our own time, Hegel’s hysterical historicism is still the
fertilizer to which modern totalitarianism owes its rapid growth. Its
use has prepared the ground, and has educated the intelligentsia to
intellectual dishonesty, as will be shown in section V of this
chapter. We have to learn the lesson that intellectual honesty is
fundamental for everything we cherish.
But is this all? And is it just? Is there nothing in the claim that
Hegel’s greatness lies in the fact that he was the creator of a new,
of a historical way of thinking—of a new historical sense?
Many of my friends have criticized me for my attitude towards
Hegel, and for my inability to see his greatness. They were, of
course, quite right, since I was indeed unable to see it. (I am so
still.) In order to remedy this fault, I made a fairly systematic
inquiry into the question, Wherein lies Hegel’s greatness?
The result was disappointing. No doubt, Hegel’s talk about the
vastness and greatness of the historical drama created an
atmosphere of interest in history. No doubt, his vast historicist
generalizations, periodizations, and interpretations fascinated some
historians and challenged them to produce valuable and detailed
historical studies (which nearly invariably showed the weakness of
Hegel’s findings as well as of his method). But was this
challenging influence the achievement of either a historian or a
philosopher? Was it not, rather, that of a propagandist? Historians,

I found, tend to value Hegel (if at all) as a philosopher, and
philosophers tend to believe that his contributions (if any) were to
the understanding of history. But historicism is not history, and to
believe in it reveals neither historical understanding nor historical
sense. And if we wish to evaluate Hegel’s greatness, as a historian
or as a philosopher, we should not ask ourselves whether some
people found his vision of history inspiring, but whether there was
much truth in this vision.
I found only one idea which was important and which might be
claimed to be implicit in Hegel’s philosophy. It is the idea which
leads Hegel to attack abstract rationalism and intellectualism which
does not appreciate the indebtedness of reason to tradition. It is a
certain awareness of the fact (which, however, Hegel forgets in his
Logic) that men cannot start with a blank, creating a world of
thought from nothing; but that their thoughts are, largely, the
product of an intellectual inheritance.
I am ready to admit that this is an important point, and one
which might be found in Hegel if one is willing to search for it.
But I deny that it was Hegel’s own contribution. It was the
common property of the Romantics. That all social entities are
products of history; not inventions, planned by reason, but
formations emerging from the vagaries of historical events, from
the interplay of ideas and interests, from sufferings and from
passions, all this is older than Hegel. It goes back to Edmund
Burke, whose appreciation of the significance of tradition for the
functioning of all social institutions had immensely influenced the
political thought of the German Romantic Movement. The trace of
his influence can be found in Hegel, but only in the exaggerated
and untenable form of an historical and evolutionary relativism—
in the form of the dangerous doctrine that what is believed to-day
is, in fact, true to-day, and in the equally dangerous corollary that
what was true yesterday (true, and not merely ‘believed’) may be
false to-morrow—a doctrine which, surely, is not likely to
encourage an appreciation of the significance of tradition.
V
I now proceed to the last part of my treatment of Hegelianism,
to the analysis of the dependence of the new tribalism or
totalitarianism upon the doctrines of Hegel.
If it were my aim to write a history of the rise of
totalitarianism, I should have to deal with Marxism first; for

fascism grew partly out of the spiritual and political breakdown of
Marxism. (And, as we shall see, a similar statement may be made
about the relationship between Leninism and Marxism.) Since my
main issue, however, is historicism, I propose to deal with
Marxism later, as the purest form of historicism that has so far
arisen, and to tackle fascism first.
Modern totalitarianism is only an episode within the perennial
revolt against freedom and reason. From older episodes it is
distinguished not so much by its ideology, as by the fact that its
leaders succeeded in realizing one of the boldest dreams of their
predecessors; they made the revolt against freedom a popular
movement. (Its popularity, of course, must not be overrated; the
intelligentsia are only a part of the people.) It was made possible
only by the breakdown, in the countries concerned, of another
popular movement, Social Democracy or the democratic version of
Marxism, which in the minds of the working people stood for the
ideas of freedom and equality. When it became obvious that it was
not just by chance that this movement had failed in 1914 to make a
determined stand against war; when it became clear that it was
helpless to cope with the problems of peace, most of all with
unemployment and economic depression; and when, at last, this
movement defended itself only halfheartedly against fascist
aggression, then the belief in the value of freedom and in the
possibility of equality was seriously threatened, and the perennial
revolt against freedom could by hook or by crook acquire a more
or less popular backing.
The fact that fascism had to take over part of the heritage of
Marxism accounts for the one ‘original’ feature of fascist ideology,
for the one point in which it deviates from the traditional makeup
of the revolt against freedom. The point I have in mind is that
fascism has not much use for an open appeal to the supernatural.
Not that it is necessarily atheistic or lacking in mystical or
religious elements. But the spread of agnosticism through Marxism
led to a situation in which no political creed aiming at popularity
among the working class could bind itself to any of the traditional
religious forms. This is why fascism added to its official ideology,
in its early stages at least, some admixture of nineteenth-century
evolutionist materialism.
Thus the formula of the fascist brew is in all countries the
same: Hegel plus a dash of nineteenth-century materialism
(especially Darwinism in the somewhat crude form given to it by

Haeckel65). The ‘scientific’ element in racialism can be traced back
to Haeckel, who was responsible, in 1900, for a prize-competition
whose subject was: ‘What can we learn from the principles of
Darwinism in respect of the internal and political development of a
state?’ The first prize was allotted to a voluminous racialist work
by W. Schallmeyer, who thus became the grandfather of racial
biology. It is interesting to observe how strongly this materialist
racialism, despite its very different origin, resembles the naturalism
of Plato. In both cases, the basic idea is that degeneration,
particularly of the upper classes, is at the root of political decay
(read: of the advance of the open society). Moreover, the modern
myth of Blood and Soil has its exact counterpart in Plato’s Myth of
the Earthborn. Nevertheless, not ‘Hegel + Plato’, but ‘Hegel +
Haeckel’ is the formula of modern racialism. As we shall see,
Marx replaced Hegel’s ‘Spirit’ by matter, and by material and
economic interests. In the same way, racialism substitutes for
Hegel’s ‘Spirit’ something material, the quasi-biological
conception of Blood or Race. Instead of ‘Spirit’, Blood is the selfdeveloping essence; instead of ‘Spirit’, Blood is the Sovereign of
the world, and displays itself on the Stage of History; and instead
of its ‘Spirit’, the Blood of a nation determines its essential
destiny.
The transubstantiation of Hegelianism into racialism or of
Spirit into Blood does not greatly alter the main tendency of
Hegelianism. It only gives it a tinge of biology and of modern
evolutionism. The outcome is a materialistic and at the same time
mystical religion of a self-developing biological essence, very
closely reminiscent of the religion of creative evolution (whose
prophet was the Hegelian66 Bergson), a religion which G. B. Shaw,
more prophetically than profoundly, once characterized as ‘a faith
which complied with the first condition of all religions that have
ever taken hold of humanity: namely, that it must be .. a metabiology’. And indeed, this new religion of racialism clearly shows
a meta-component and a biology-component, as it were, or
Hegelian mystical metaphysics and Haeckelian materialist biology.
So much about the difference between modern totalitarianism
and Hegelianism. In spite of its significance from the point of view
of popularity, this difference is unimportant so far as their main
political tendencies are concerned. But if we now turn to the
similarities, then we get another picture. Nearly all the more
important ideas of modern totalitarianism are directly inherited

from Hegel, who collected, and preserved what A. Zimmern calls67
the ‘armoury of weapons for authoritarian movements’. Although
most of these weapons were not forged by Hegel himself, but
discovered by him in the various ancient war treasuries of the
perennial revolt against freedom, it is undoubtedly his effort which
rediscovered them and placed them in the hands of his modern
followers. Here is a brief list of some of the most precious of these
ideas. (I omit Platonic totalitarianism and tribalism, which have
already been discussed, as well as the theory of master and slave.)
(a) Nationalism, in the form of the historicist idea that the state
is the incarnation of the Spirit (or now, of the Blood) of the statecreating nation (or race); one chosen nation (now, the chosen race)
is destined for world domination, (b) The state as the natural
enemy of all other states must assert its existence in war. (c) The
state is exempt from any kind of moral obligation; history, that is,
historical success, is the sole judge; collective utility is the sole
principle of personal conduct; propagandist lying and distortion of
the truth is permissible, (d) The ‘ethical’ idea of war (total and
collectivist), particularly of young nations against older ones; war,
fate and fame as most desirable goods. (e) The creative role of the
Great Man, the world-historical personality, the man of deep
knowledge and great passion (now, the principle of leadership). (f)
The ideal of the heroic life (‘ live dangerously’) and of the ‘heroic
man’ as opposed to the petty bourgeois and his life of shallow
mediocrity.
This list of spiritual treasures is neither systematic nor
complete. All of them are part and parcel of an old patrimony. And
they were stored up, and made ready for use, not only in the works
of Hegel and his followers, but also in the minds of an
intelligentsia fed exclusively for three long generations on such
debased spiritual food, early recognized by Schopenhauer68 as an
‘intelligence-destroying pseudo-philosophy’ and as a ‘mischievous
and criminal misuse of language’. I now proceed to a more detailed
examination of the various points in this list.
(a) According to modern totalitarian doctrines, the state as such
is not the highest end. This is, rather, the Blood, and the People,
the Race. The higher races possess the power to create states. The
highest aim of a race or nation is to form a mighty state which can
serve as a powerful instrument of its self-preservation. This
teaching (but for the substitution of Blood for Spirit) is due to
Hegel, who wrote69: ‘In the existence of a Nation, the substantial

aim is to be a State and preserve itself as such. A Nation that has
not formed itself into a State—a mere Nation—has strictly
speaking no history, like the Nations .. which existed in a condition
of savagery. What happens to a Nation .. has its essential
significance in relation to the State.’ The state which is thus
formed is to be totalitarian, that is to say, its might must permeate
and control the whole life of the people in all its functions: ‘The
State is therefore the basis and centre of all the concrete elements
in the life of a people: of Art, Law, Morals, Religion, and Science
... The substance that .. exists in that concrete reality which is the
state, is the Spirit of the People itself. The actual State is animated
by this Spirit in all its particular affairs, in its Wars, Institutions,
etc.’ Since the state must be powerful, it must contest the powers
of other states. It must assert itself on the ‘Stage of History’, must
prove its peculiar essence or Spirit and its ‘strictly defined’
national character by its historical deeds, and must ultimately aim
at world domination. Here is an outline of this historicist
essentialism in Hegel’s words: ‘The very essence of Spirit is
activity; it actualizes its potentiality, and makes itself its own deed,
its own work .. Thus it is with the Spirit of a Nation; it is a Spirit
having strictly defined characteristics which exist and persist .. in
the events and transitions that make up its history. That is its
work—that is what this particular Nation is. Nations are what their
deeds are ... A Nation is moral, virtuous, vigorous, as long as it is
engaged in realizing its grand objects ... The constitutions under
which World-Historical Peoples have reached their culminations
are peculiar to them .. Therefore, from .. the political institutions of
the ancient World-Historical Peoples, nothing can be learned ...
Each particular National Genius is to be treated as only One
Individual in the process of Universal History.’ The Spirit or
National Genius must finally prove itself in World-Domination:
‘The self-consciousness of a particular Nation .. is the objective
actuality in which the Spirit of the Time invests its Will. Against
this absolute Will the other particular national minds have no
rights: that Nation dominates the World ..’
But Hegel not only developed the historical and totalitarian
theory of nationalism, he also clearly foresaw the psychological
possibilities of nationalism. He saw that nationalism answers a
need—the desire of men to find and to know their definite place in
the world, and to belong to a powerful collective body. At the same
time he exhibits that remarkable characteristic of German

nationalism, its strongly developed feelings of inferiority (to use a
more recent terminology), especially towards the English. And he
consciously appeals, with his nationalism or tribalism, to those
feelings which I have described (in chapter 10) as the strain of
civilization: ‘Every Englishman’, Hegel writes70, ‘will say: We are
the men who navigate the ocean, and who have the commerce of
the world; to whom the East Indies belong and their riches ... The
relation of the individual man to that Spirit is .. that it .. enables
him to have a definite place in the world—to be something. For he
finds in .. the people to which he belongs an already established,
firm world .. with which he has to incorporate himself. In this its
work, and therefore its world, the Spirit of the people enjoys its
existence and finds satisfaction.’
(b) A theory common to both Hegel and his racialist followers
is that the state by its very essence can exist only through its
contrast to other individual states. H. Freyer, one of the leading
sociologists of present-day Germany, writes71: ‘A being that draws
itself round its own core creates, even unintentionally, the
boundary-line. And the frontier—even though it be
unintentionally—creates the enemy.’ Similarly Hegel: ‘Just as the
individual is not a real person unless related to other persons so the
State is no real individuality unless related to other States ... The
relation of one particular State to another presents .. the most
shifting play of .. passions, interests, aims, talents, virtues, power,
injustice, vice, and mere external chance. It is a play in which even
the Ethical Whole, the Independence of the State, is exposed to
accident.’ Should we not, therefore, attempt to regulate this
unfortunate state of affairs by adopting Kant’s plans for the
establishment of eternal peace by means of a federal union?
Certainly not, says Hegel, commenting on Kant’s plan for peace:
‘Kant proposed an alliance of princes’, Hegel says rather inexactly
(for Kant proposed a federation of what we now call democratic
states), ‘which should settle the controversies of States; and the
Holy Alliance probably aspired to be an institution of this kind.
The State, however, is an individual; and in individuality, negation
is essentially contained. A number of States may constitute
themselves into a family, but this confederation, as an
individuality, must create opposition and so beget an enemy.’ For
in Hegel’s dialectics, negation equals limitation, and therefore
means not only the boundary-line, the frontier, but also the creation
of an opposition, of an enemy: ‘The fortunes and deeds of States in

their relation to one another reveal the dialectic of the finite nature
of these Spirits.’ These quotations are taken from the Philosophy of
Law; yet in his earlier Encyclopedia, Hegel’s theory anticipates the
modern theories, for instance that of Freyer, even more closely:
‘The final aspect of the State is to appear in immediate actuality as
a single nation ... As a single individual it is exclusive of other like
individuals. In their mutual relations, waywardness and chance
have a place ... This independency .. reduces disputes between
them to terms of mutual violence, to a state of war ... It is this state
of war in which the omnipotence of the State manifests itself ..’
Thus the Prussian historian Treitschke only shows how well he
understands Hegelian dialectic essentialism when he repeats: ‘War
is not only a practical necessity, it is also a theoretical necessity, an
exigency of logic. The concept of the State implies the concept of
war, for the essence of the State is Power. The State is the People
organized in sovereign Power.’
(c) The State is the Law, the moral law as well as the juridical
law. Thus it cannot be subject to any other standard, and especially
not to the yardstick of civil morality. Its historical responsibilities
are deeper. Its only judge is the History of the World. The only
possible standard of a judgement upon the state is the world
historical success of its actions. And this success, the power and
expansion of the state, must overrule all other considerations in the
private life of the citizens; right is what serves the might of the
state. This is the theory of Plato; it is the theory of modern
totalitarianism; and it is the theory of Hegel: it is the PlatonicPrussian morality. ‘The State’, Hegel writes72, ‘is the realization of
the ethical Idea. It is the ethical Spirit as revealed, self-conscious,
substantial Will.’ Consequently, there can be no ethical idea above
the state. ‘When the particular Wills of the States can come to no
agreement, their controversy can be decided only by war. What
offence shall be regarded as a breach of treaty, or as a violation of
respect and honour, must remain indefinite ... The State may
identify its infinitude and honour with every one of its aspects.’
For’.. the relation among States fluctuates, and no judge exists to
adjust their differences.’ In other words: ‘Against the State there is
no power to decide what is .. right ... States .. may enter into
mutual agreements, but they are, at the same time, superior to these
agreements’ (i.e. they need not keep them)... ‘Treaties between
states .. depend ultimately on the particular sovereign wills, and for
that reason, they must remain unreliable.’

Thus only one kind of ‘judgement’ can be passed on WorldHistorical deeds and events: their result, their success. Hegel can
therefore identify73 ‘the essential destiny—the absolute aim, or,
what amounts to the same—the true result of the World’s History’.
To be successful, that is, to emerge as the strongest from the
dialectical struggle of the different National Spirits for power, for
world-domination, is thus the only and ultimate aim and the only
basis of judgement; or as Hegel puts it more poetically: ‘Out of this
dialectic rises the universal Spirit, the unlimited World-Spirit,
pronouncing its judgement—and its judgement is the highest—
upon the finite Nations of the World’s History; for the History of
the World is the World’s court of justice.’
Freyer has very similar ideas, but he expresses them more
frankly74: ‘A manly, a bold tone prevails in history. He who has the
grip has the booty. He who makes a faulty move is done for .. he
who wishes to hit his mark must know how to shoot.’ But all these
ideas are, in the last instance, only repetitions of Heraclitus: ‘War ..
proves some to be gods and others to be mere men, by turning the
latter into slaves and the former into masters ... War is just.’
According to these theories, there can be no moral difference
between a war in which we are attacked, and one in which we
attack our neighbours; the only possible difference is success. F.
Haiser, author of the book Slavery: Its Biological Foundation and
Moral Justification (1923), a prophet of a master race and of a
master morality, argues: ‘If we are to defend ourselves, then there
must also be aggressors ..; if so, why then should we not be the
aggressors ourselves?’ But even this doctrine (its predecessor is
Clausewitz’s famous doctrine that an attack is always the most
effective defence) is Hegelian; for Hegel, when speaking about
offences that lead to war, not only shows the necessity for a ‘war
of defence’ to turn into a ‘war of conquest’, but he informs us that
some states which have a strong individuality ‘will naturally be
more inclined to irritability’, in order to find an occasion and a
field for what he euphemistically calls ‘intense activity’.
With the establishment of historical success as the sole judge in
matters relating to states or nations, and with the attempt to break
down such moral distinctions as those between attack and defence,
it becomes necessary to argue against the morality of conscience.
Hegel does it by establishing what he calls ‘true morality or rather
social virtue’ in opposition to ‘false morality’. Needless to say, this
‘true morality’ is the Platonic totalitarian morality, combined with

a dose of historicism, while the ‘false morality’ which he also
describes as ‘mere formal rectitude’ is that of personal conscience.
‘We may fairly’, Hegel writes75, ‘establish the true principles of
morality, or rather of social virtue, in opposition to false morality;
for the History of the World occupies a higher ground than that
morality which is personal in character—the conscience of
individuals, their particular will and mode of action ... What the
absolute aim of Spirit requires and accomplishes, what Providence
does, transcends .. the imputation of good and bad motives ...
Consequently it is only formal rectitude, deserted by the living
Spirit and by God, which those who take their stand upon ancient
right and order maintain.’ (That is to say, the moralists who refer,
for example, to the New Testament.) ‘The deeds of Great Men, of
the Personalities of World History, .. must not be brought into
collision with irrelevant moral claims. The Litany of private
virtues, of modesty, humility, philanthropy, and forbearance, must
not be raised against them. The History of the World can, in
principle, entirely ignore the circle within which morality .. lies.’
Here, at last, we have the perversion of the third of the ideas of
1789, that of fraternity, or, as Hegel says, of philanthropy, together
with the ethics of conscience. This Platonic-Hegelian historicist
moral theory has been repeated over and over again. The famous
historian E. Meyer, for example, speaks of the ‘flat and moralizing
evaluation, which judges great political undertakings with the
yardstick of civil morality, ignoring the deeper, the truly moral
factors of the State and of historical responsibilities’.
When such views are held, then all hesitation regarding
propagandist lying and distortion of the truth must disappear,
particularly if it is successful in furthering the power of the state.
Hegel’s approach to this problem, however, is rather subtle: ‘A
great mind has publicly raised the question’, he writes76, ‘whether
it is permissible to deceive the People. The answer is that the
People will not permit themselves to be deceived concerning their
substantial basis’ (F. Haiser, the master moralist, says: ‘no error is
possible where the racial soul dictates’) ‘but it deceives itself,
Hegel continues, ‘about the way it knows this ... Public opinion
deserves therefore to be esteemed as much as to be despised ...
Thus to be independent of public opinion is the first condition of
achieving anything great ... And great achievements are certain to
be subsequently recognized and accepted by public opinion ..’ In
brief, it is always success that counts. If the lie was successful,

then it was no lie, since the People were not deceived concerning
their substantial basis.
(d) We have seen that the State, particularly in its relation to
other states, is exempt from morality—it is a-moral. We may
therefore expect to hear that war is not a moral evil, but morally
neutral. However, Hegel’s theory defies this expectation; it implies
that war is good in itself. ‘There is an ethical element in war’, we
read77. ‘It is necessary to recognize that the Finite, such as property
and life, is accidental. This necessity appears first under the form
of a force of nature, for all things finite are mortal and transient. In
the ethical order, in the State, however, .. this necessity is exalted
to a work of freedom, to an ethical law ... War .. now becomes an
element .. of .. right ... War has the deep meaning that by it the
ethical health of a nation is preserved and their finite aims
uprooted ... War protects the people from the corruption which an
everlasting peace would bring upon it. History shows phases which
illustrate how successful wars have checked internal unrest ...
These Nations, torn by internal strife, win peace at home as a result
of war abroad.’ This passage, taken from the Philosophy of Law,
shows the influence of Plato’s and Aristotle’s teaching on the
‘dangers of prosperity’; at the same time, the passage is a good
instance of the identification of the moral with the healthy, of
ethics with political hygiene, or of right with might; this leads
directly, as will be seen, to the identification of virtue and vigour,
as the following passage from Hegel’s Philosophy of History
shows. (It follows immediately after the passage already
mentioned, dealing with nationalism as a means of getting over
one’s feelings of inferiority, and thereby suggests that even a war
can be an appropriate means to that noble end.) At the same time,
the modern theory of the virtuous aggressiveness of the young or
have-not countries against the wicked old possessor countries is
clearly implied. ‘A Nation’, Hegel writes, ‘is moral, virtuous,
vigorous while it is engaged in realizing its grand objects ... But
this having been attained, the activity displayed by the Spirit of the
People .. is no longer needed ... The Nation can still accomplish
much in war and peace .. but the living substantial soul itself may
be said to have ceased its activity ... The Nation lives the same
kind of life as the individual when passing from maturity to old age
... This mere customary life (the watch wound up and going of
itself) is that which brings on natural death ... Thus perish
individuals, thus perish peoples by a natural death ... A people can

only die a violent death when it has become naturally dead in
itself.’ (The last remarks belong to the decline-and-fall tradition.)
Hegel’s ideas on war are surprisingly modern; he even
visualizes the moral consequences of mechanization; or rather, he
sees in mechanical warfare the consequences of the ethical Spirit
of totalitarianism or collectivism78: ‘There are different kinds of
bravery. The courage of the animal, or the robber, the bravery that
arises from a sense of honour, chivalrous bravery, are not yet the
true forms of bravery. In civilized nations true bravery consists in
the readiness to give oneself wholly to the service of the State so
that the individual counts but as one among many.’ (An allusion to
universal conscription.) ‘Not personal valour is significant; the
important aspect lies in self-subordination to the universal. This
higher form causes .. bravery to appear more mechanical ...
Hostility is directed not against separate individuals, but against a
hostile whole’ (here we have an anticipation of the principle of
total war); ‘... personal valour appears as impersonal. This
principle has caused the invention of the gun; it is not a chance
invention ..’ In a similar vein, Hegel says of the invention of
gunpowder: ‘Humanity needed it, and it made its appearance
forthwith.’ (How kind of Providence!) It is thus purest
Hegelianism when the philosopher E. Kaufmann, in 1911, argues
against the Kantian ideal of a community of free men: ‘Not a
community of men of free will but a victorious war is the social
ideal .. it is in war that the State displays its true nature’79; or when
E. Banse, the famous ‘military scientist’, writes in 1933: ‘War
means the highest intensification .. of all spiritual energies of an
age .. it means the utmost effort of the people’s Spiritual power ..
Spirit and Action linked together. Indeed, war provides the basis
on which the human soul may manifest itself at its fullest height ...
Nowhere else can the Will .. of the Race .. rise into being thus
integrally as in war.’ And General Ludendorff continues in 1935:
‘During the years of the so-called peace, politics .. have only a
meaning inasmuch as they prepare for total war.’ He thus only
formulates more precisely an idea voiced by the famous
essentialist philosopher Max Scheler in 1915: ‘War means the
State in its most actual growth and rise: it means politics.’ The
same Hegelian doctrine is reformulated by Freyer in 1935: ‘The
State, from the first moment of its existence, takes its stand in the
sphere of war ... War is not only the most perfect form of State
activity, it is the very element in which the State is embedded; war

delayed, prevented, disguised, avoided, must of course be included
in the term.’ But the boldest conclusion is drawn by F. Lenz, who,
in his book The Race as the Principle of Value, tentatively raises
the question: ‘But if humanity were to be the goal of morality, then
have not we, after all, taken the wrong side?’ and who, of course,
immediately dispels this absurd suggestion by replying: ‘Far be it
from us to think that humanity should condemn war: nay, it is war
that condemns humanity.’ This idea is linked up with historicism
by E. Jung, who remarks: ‘Humanitarianism, or the idea of
mankind . . is no regulator of history.’ But it was Hegel’s
predecessor, Fichte, called by Schopenhauer the ‘wind-bag’, who
must be credited with the original anti-humanitarian argument.
Speaking of the word ‘humanity’, Fichte wrote: ‘If one had
presented, to the German, instead of the Roman word
“humaneness”, its proper translation, the word “manhood”, then ..
he would have said: “It is after all not so very much to be a man
instead of a wild beast!” This is how a German would have
spoken—in a manner which would have been impossible for a
Roman. For in the German language, ‘manhood’ has remained a
merely phenomenal notion; it has never become a superphenomenal idea, as it did among the Romans. Whoever might
attempt to smuggle, cunningly, this alien Roman symbol’ (viz., the
word ‘humaneness’) ‘into the language of the Germans, would
thereby manifestly debase their ethical standards ..’ Fichte’s
doctrine is repeated by Spengler, who writes: ‘Manhood is either a
zoological expression or an empty word’; and also by Rosenberg,
who writes: ‘Man’s inner life became debased when .. an alien
motive was impressed upon his mind: salvation, humanitarianism,
and the culture of humanity.’
Kolnai, to whose book I am deeply indebted for a great deal of
material to which I would otherwise have had no access, says80
most strikingly: ‘All of us .. who stand for .. rational, civilized
methods of government and social organization, agree that war is
in itself an evil ...’ Adding that in the opinion of most of us (except
the pacifists) it might become, under certain circumstances, a
necessary evil, he continues: ‘The nationalist attitude is different,
though it need not imply a desire for perpetual or frequent warfare.
It sees in a war a good rather than an evil, even if it be a dangerous
good, like an exceedingly heady wine that is best reserved for rare
occasions of high festivity.’ War is not a common and abundant

evil but a precious though rare good:—this sums up the views of
Hegel and of his followers.
One of Hegel’s feats was the revival of the Heraclitean idea of
fate; and he insisted81 that this glorious Greek idea of fate as
expressive of the essence of a person, or of a nation, is opposed to
the nominalist Jewish idea of universal laws, whether of nature, or
of morals. The essentialist doctrine of fate can be derived (as
shown in the last chapter) from the view that the essence of a
nation can reveal itself only in its history. It is not ‘fatalistic’ in the
sense that it encourages inactivity; ‘destiny’ is not to be identified
with ‘predestination’. The opposite is the case. Oneself, one’s real
essence, one’s innermost soul, the stuff one is made of (will and
passion rather than reason) are of decisive importance in the
formation of one’s fate. Since Hegel’s amplification of this theory,
the idea of fate or destiny has become a favourite obsession, as it
were, of the revolt against freedom. Kolnai rightly stresses the
connection between racialism (it is fate that makes one a member
of one’s race) and hostility to freedom: ‘The principle of Race’,
Kolnai says82, ‘is meant to embody and express the utter negation
of human freedom, the denial of equal rights, a challenge in the
face of mankind.’ And he rightly insists that racialism tends ‘to
oppose Liberty by Fate, individual consciousness by the
compelling urge of the Blood beyond control and argument’. Even
this tendency is expressed by Hegel, although as usual in a
somewhat obscure manner: ‘What we call principle, aim, destiny,
or the nature or idea of Spirit’, .Hegel writes, ‘is a hidden,
undeveloped essence, which as such—however true in itself—is
not completely real ... The motive power that .. gives them ..
existence is the need, instinct, inclination and passion of men.’
The modern philosopher of total education, E. Krieck, goes further
in the direction of fatalism: ‘All rational will and activity of the
individual is confined to his everyday life; beyond this range he
can only achieve a higher destiny and fulfilment in so far as he is
gripped by superior powers of fate.’ It sounds like personal
experience when he continues: ‘Not through his own rational
scheming will he be made a creative and relevant being, only
through forces that work above and beneath him, that do not
originate in his own self but sweep and work their way through his
self . .’ (But it is an unwarranted generalization of the most
intimate personal experiences when the same philosopher thinks

that not only ‘the epoch of “objective” or “free” science is ended’,
but also that of ‘pure reason’.)
Together with the idea of fate, its counterpart, that of fame is
also revived by Hegel: ‘Individuals .. are instruments ... What they
personally gain .. through the individual share they take in the
substantial business (prepared and appointed independently of
them) is .. Fame, which is their reward.’83 And Stapel, a propagator
of the new paganized Christianity, promptly repeats: ‘All great
deeds were done for the sake of fame or glory.’ But this ‘Christian’
moralist is even more radical than Hegel: ‘Metaphysical glory is
the one true morality’, he teaches, and the ‘Categorical Imperative’
of this one true morality runs accordingly: ‘Do such deeds as spell
glory!’
(e) Yet glory cannot be acquired by everybody; the religion of
glory implies anti-equalitarianism—it implies a religion of ‘Great
Men’. Modern racialism accordingly ‘knows no equality between
souls, no equality between men’84 (Rosenberg). Thus there are no
obstacles to adopting the Leader Principle from the arsenal of the
perennial revolt against freedom, or as Hegel calls it, the idea of
the World Historical Personality. This Idea is one of Hegel’s
favourite themes. In discussing the blasphemous ‘question whether
it is permissible to deceive a people’ (see above), he says: ‘In
public opinion all is false and true, but to discover the truth in it is
the business of the Great Man. The Great Man of his time is he
who expresses the will of his time; who tells his time what it wills;
and who carries it out. He acts according to the inner Spirit and
Essence of his time, which he realizes. And he who does not
understand how to despise public opinion, as it makes itself heard
here and there, will never accomplish anything great.’ This
excellent description of the Leader—the Great Dictator—as a
publicist is combined with an elaborate myth of the Greatness of
the Great Man, that consists in his being the foremost instrument of
the Spirit in history. In this discussion of ‘Historical Men—World
Historical Individuals’ Hegel says: ‘They were practical, political
men. But at the same time they were thinking men, who had an
insight into the requirements of the time—into what was ripe for
development. . . World Historical Men—the Heroes of an epoch—
must therefore be recognized as its clear-sighted ones; their deeds,
their words are the best of that time. . . It was they who best
understood affairs; from whom others learned, and approved, or at
least acquiesced in—their policy. For the Spirit which has taken

this fresh step in History is the inmost soul of all individuals; but in
a state of unconsciousness which aroused the Great Men. . . Their
fellows, therefore, follow those Soul-Leaders, for they feel the
irresistible power of their own inner Spirit thus embodied.’ But the
Great Man is not only the man of greatest understanding and
wisdom but also the Alan of Great Passions—foremost, of course,
of political passions and ambitions. He is thereby able to arouse
passions in others. ‘Great Men have formed purposes to satisfy
themselves, not others. . . They are Great Men because they willed
and accomplished something great. . . Nothing Great in the World
has been accomplished without passion. .. This may be called the
cunning of reason—that it sets the passions to work for itself. ..
Passion, it is true, is not quite the suitable word for what I wish to
express. I mean here nothing more than human activity as resulting
from private interests—particular, or if you will, self-seeking
designs—with the qualification that the whole energy of will and
character is devoted to their attainment ... Passions, private aims,
and the satisfaction of selfish desires are .. most effective springs
of action. Their power lies in the fact that they respect none of the
limitations which justice and morality would impose on them; and
that these natural impulses have a more direct influence over their
fellow-men than the artificial and tedious discipline that tends to
order and self-restraint, law and morality.’ From Rousseau
onwards, the Romantic school of thought realized that man is not
mainly rational. But while the humanitarians cling to rationality as
an aim, the revolt against reason exploits this psychological insight
into the irrationality of man for its political aims. The fascist
appeal to ‘human nature’ is to our passions, to our collectivist
mystical needs, to ‘man the unknown’. Adopting Hegel’s words
just quoted, this appeal may be called the cunning of the revolt
against reason. But the height of this cunning is reached by Hegel
in this boldest dialectical twist of his. While paying lip-service to
rationalism, while talking more loudly about ‘reason’ than any man
before or after him, he ends up in irrationalism; in an apotheosis
not only of passion, but of brutal force: ‘It is’, Hegel writes, ‘the
absolute interest of Reason that this Moral Whole’ (i.e. the State)
‘should exist; and herein lies the justification and merit of heroes,
the founders of States—however cruel they may have been ... Such
men may treat other great and even sacred interests inconsiderately
... But so mighty a form must trample down many an innocent
flower; it must crush to pieces many an object on its path.’

(f) The conception of man as being not so much a rational as an
heroic animal was not invented by the revolt against reason; it is a
typical tribalist ideal. We have to distinguish between this ideal of
the Heroic Man and a more reasonable respect for heroism.
Heroism is, and always will be, admirable; but our admiration
should depend, I think, very largely on our appreciation of the
cause to which the hero has devoted himself. The heroic element in
gangsterism, I think, deserves little appreciation. But we should
admire Captain Scott and his party, and if possible even more, the
heroes of X-ray or of Yellow Fever research; and certainly those
who defend freedom. The tribal ideal of the Heroic Man, especially
in its fascist form, is based upon different views. It is a direct
attack upon those things which make heroism admirable to most of
us—such things as the furthering of civilization. For it is an attack
on the idea of civil life itself; this is denounced as shallow and
materialistic, because of the idea of security which it cherishes.
Live dangerously! is its imperative; the cause for which you
undertake to follow this imperative is of secondary importance; or
as W. Best says85: ‘Good fighting as such, not a “good cause” .. is
the thing that turns the scale ... It merely matters how, not for what
object we fight’. Again we find that this argument is an elaboration
of Hegelian ideas: ‘In peace’, Hegel writes, ‘civil life becomes
more extended, every sphere is hedged in and at last all men
stagnate ... From the pulpits much is preached concerning the
insecurity, vanity, and instability of temporal things, and yet
everyone .. thinks that he, at least, will manage to hold on to his
possessions ... It is necessary to recognize .. property and life as
accidental ... Let insecurity finally come in the form of Hussars
with glistening sabres, and show its earnest activity!’ In another
place, Hegel paints a gloomy picture of what lie calls’ mere
customary life’; he seems to mean by it something like the normal
life of a civilized community: ‘Custom is activity without
opposition .. in which fullness and zest is out of the question—a
merely external and sensuous’ (i.e. what some people in our day
like to call ‘materialist’) ‘existence which has ceased to throw
itself enthusiastically into its object .. , an existence without
intellect or vitality.’ Hegel, always faithful to his historicism, bases
his anti-utilitarian attitude (in distinction to Aristotle’s utilitarian
comments upon the ‘dangers of prosperity’) on his interpretation of
history: ‘The History of the World is no theatre of happiness.
Periods of happiness are blank pages in it, for they are periods of

harmony.’ Thus, liberalism, freedom and reason are, as usual,
objects of Hegel’s attacks. The hysterical cries: We want our
history! We want our destiny! We want our fight! We want our
chains! resound through the edifice of Hegelianism, through this
stronghold of the closed society and of the revolt against freedom.
In spite of Hegel’s, as it were, official optimism, based on his
theory that what is rational is real, there are features in him to
which one can trace the pessimism which is so characteristic of the
more intelligent among the modern racial philosophers; not so
much, perhaps, of the earlier ones (as Lagarde, Treitschke, or
Moeller van den Bruck) but of those who came after Spengler, the
famous historicist. Neither Spengler’s biological holism, intuitive
understanding, Group-Spirit and Spirit of the Age, nor even his
Romanticism, helps this fortune-teller to escape a very pessimistic
outlook. An element of blank despair is unmistakable in the ‘grim’
activism that is left to those who foresee the future and feel
instrumental in its arrival. It is interesting to observe that this
gloomy view of affairs is equally shared by both wings of the
racialists, the ‘Atheist’ as well as the ‘Christian’ wing.
Stapel, who belongs to the latter (but there are others, for
example Gogarten), writes86: ‘Man is under the sway of original
sin in his totality .. The Christian knows that it is strictly
impossible for him to live except in sin .. Therefore he steers clear
of the pettiness of moral hair-splitting ... An ethicized Christianity
is a counter-Christianity through and through ... God has made this
world perishable, it is doomed to destruction. May it, then, go to
the dogs according to destiny! Men who imagine themselves
capable of making it better, who want to create a “higher”
morality, are starting a ridiculous petty revolt against God ... The
hope of Heaven does not mean the expectation of a happiness of
the blessed; it means obedience and War-Comradeship.’ (The
return to the tribe.) ‘If God orders His man to go to hell, then his
sworn adherent .. will accordingly go to hell ... If He allots to him
eternal pain, this has to be borne too ... Faith is but another word
for victory. It is victory that the Lord demands ..’
A very similar spirit lives in the work of the two leading
philosophers of contemporary Germany, the ‘existentialists’
Heidegger and Jaspers, both originally followers of the essentialist
philosophers Husserl and Scheler. Heidegger has gained fame by
reviving the Hegelian Philosophy of Nothingness: Hegel had
‘established’ the theory87 that ‘Pure Being’ and ‘Pure Nothingness’

are identical; he had said that if you try to think out the notion of a
pure being, you must abstract from it all particular ‘determinations
of an object’, and therefore, as Hegel puts it—‘nothing remains’.
(This Heraclitean method might be used for proving all kinds of
pretty identities, such as that of pure wealth and pure poverty, pure
mastership and pure servitude, pure Aryanism and pure Judaism.)
Heidegger ingeniously applies the Hegelian theory of Nothingness
to a practical Philosophy of Life, or of ‘Existence’. Life, Existence,
can be understood only by understanding Nothingness. In his What
is Metaphysics? Heidegger says: ‘The enquiry should be into the
Existing or else into—nothing; .. into the existing alone, and
beyond it into—Nothingness.’ The enquiry into nothingness (‘
Where do we search for Nothingness? Where can we find
Nothingness?’) is made possible by the fact that ‘we know
Nothingness’; we know it through fear: ‘Fear reveals
Nothingness.’
Fear; the fear of nothingness; the anguish of death; these are
the basic categories of Heidegger’s Philosophy of Existence; of a
life whose true meaning it is88’ to be cast down into existence,
directed towards death’. Human existence is to be interpreted as a
‘Thunderstorm of Steel’; the ‘determined existence’ of a man is ‘to
be a self, passionately free to die .. in full self-consciousness and
anguish’. But these gloomy confessions are not entirely without
their comforting aspect. The reader need not be quite overwhelmed
by Heidegger’s passion to die. For the will to power and the will to
live appear to be no less developed in him than in his master,
Hegel. ‘The German University’s Will to the Essence’, Heidegger
writes in 1933, ‘is a Will to Science; it is a Will to the historicospiritual mission of the German Nation, as a Nation experiencing
itself in its State. Science and German Destiny must attain Power,
especially in the essential Will.’ This passage, though not a
monument of originality or clarity, is certainly one of loyalty to his
masters; and those admirers of Heidegger who in spite of all this
continue to believe in the profundity of his ‘Philosophy of
Existence’ might be reminded of Schopenhauer’s words: ‘Who can
really believe that truth also will come to light, just as a byproduct?’ And in view of the last of Heidegger’s quotations, they
should ask themselves whether Schopenhauer’s advice to a
dishonest guardian has not been successfully administered by
many educationists to many promising youths, inside and outside
of Germany. I have in mind the passage: ‘Should you ever intend

to dull the wits of a young man and to incapacitate his brains for
any kind of thought whatever, then you cannot do better than give
him Hegel to read. For these monstrous accumulations of words
that annul and contradict one another drive the mind into
tormenting itself with vain attempts to think anything whatever in
connection with them, until finally it collapses from sheer
exhaustion. Thus any ability to think is so thoroughly destroyed
that the young man will ultimately mistake empty and hollow
verbiage for real thought. A guardian fearing that his ward might
become too intelligent for his schemes might prevent this
misfortune by innocently suggesting the reading of Hegel.’
Jaspers declares89 his nihilist tendencies more frankly even, if
that is possible, than Heidegger. Only when you are faced with
Nothingness, with annihilation, Jaspers teaches, will you be able to
experience and appreciate Existence. In order to live in the
essential sense, one must live in a crisis. In order to taste life one
has not only to risk, but to lose!—Jaspers carries the historicist
idea of change and destiny recklessly to its most gloomy extreme.
All things must perish; everything ends in failure: in this way does
the historicist law of development present itself to his disillusioned
intellect. But face destruction—and you will get the thrill of your
life! Only in the ‘marginal situations’, on the edge between
existence and nothingness, do we really live. The bliss of life
always coincides with the end of its intelligibility, particularly with
extreme situations of the body, above all with bodily danger. You
cannot taste life without tasting failure. Enjoy yourself perishing!
This is the philosophy of the gambler—of the gangster.
Needless to say, this demoniac ‘religion of Urge and Fear, of the
Triumphant or else the Hunted Beast’ (Kolnai90), this absolute
nihilism in the fullest sense of the word, is not a popular creed. It is
a confession characteristic of an esoteric group of intellectuals who
have surrendered their reason, and with it, their humanity.
There is another Germany, that of the ordinary people whose
brains have not been poisoned by a devastating system of higher
education. But this ‘other’ Germany is certainly not that of her
thinkers. It is true, Germany had also some ‘other’ thinkers
(foremost among them, Kant); however, the survey just finished is
not encouraging, and I fully sympathize with Kolnai’s remark91:
‘Perhaps it is not .. a paradox to solace our despair at German
culture with the consideration that, after all, there is another

Germany of Prussian Generals besides the Germany of Prussian
Thinkers.’
VI
I have tried to show the identity of Hegelian historicism with
the philosophy of modern totalitarianism. This identity is seldom
clearly enough realized. Hegelian historicism has become the
language of wide circles of intellectuals, even of candid ‘antifascists’ and ‘leftists’. It is so much a part of their intellectual
atmosphere that, for many, it is no more noticeable, and its
appalling dishonesty no more remarkable, than the air they breathe.
Yet some racial philosophers are fully conscious of their
indebtedness to Hegel. An example is H. O. Ziegler, who in his
study, The Modern Nation, rightly describes92 the introduction of
Hegel’s (and A. Mueller’s) idea of ‘collective Spirits conceived as
Personalities’, as the ‘Copernican revolution in the Philosophy of
the Nation’. Another illustration of this awareness of the
significance of Hegelianism, which might specially interest British
readers, can be found in the judgements passed in a recent German
history of British philosophy (by R. Metz, 1935). A man of the
excellence of T. H. Green is here criticized, not of course because
he was influenced by Hegel, but because he ‘fell back into the
typical individualism of the English ... He shrank from such radical
consequences as Hegel has drawn’. Hobhouse, who fought bravely
against Hegelianism, is contemptuously described as representing
‘a typical form of bourgeois liberalism, defending itself against the
omnipotence of the State because it feels its freedom threatened
thereby’—a feeling which to some people might appear well
founded. Bosanquet of course is praised for his genuine
Hegelianism. But the significant fact is that this is all taken
perfectly seriously by most of the British reviewers.
I mention this fact mainly because I wish to show how difficult
and, at the same time, how urgent it is to continue Schopenhauer’s
fight against this shallow cant (which Hegel himself accurately
fathomed when describing his own philosophy as of ‘the most lofty
depth’). At least the new generation should be helped to free
themselves from this intellectual fraud, the greatest, perhaps, in the
history of our civilization and its quarrels with its enemies. Perhaps
they will live up to the expectations of Schopenhauer, who in 1840
prophesied93 that ‘this colossal mystification will furnish posterity
with an inexhaustible source of sarcasm’. (So far the great

pessimist has proved a wild optimist concerning posterity.) The
Hegelian farce has done enough harm. We must stop it. We must
speak—even at the price of soiling ourselves by touching this
scandalous thing which, unfortunately without success, was so
clearly exposed a hundred years ago. Too many philosophers have
neglected Schopenhauer’s incessantly repeated warnings; they
neglected them not so much at their own peril (they did not fare
badly) as at the peril of those whom they taught, and at the peril of
mankind.
It seems to me a fitting conclusion to this chapter if I leave the
last word to Schopenhauer, the anti-nationalist who said of Hegel a
hundred years ago: ‘He exerted, not on philosophy alone but on all
forms of German literature, a devastating, or more strictly
speaking, a stupefying, one could also say, a pestiferous, influence.
To combat this influence forcefully and on every occasion is the
duty of everybody who is able to judge independently. For if we
are silent, who will speak?’

Marx’s Method
The collectivists .. have the zest for progress the sympathy for
the poor, the burning sense of wrong, the impulse for great deeds,
which have been lacking in latter-day liberalism. But their science
is founded on a profound misunderstanding .. , and their actions,
therefore, are deeply destructive and reactionary. So men’s hearts
are torn, their minds divided, they are offered impossible choices.
—WALTER LIPPMAN

Chapter 13: Marx’s Sociological Determinism
It has always been the strategy of the revolt against freedom ‘to
take advantage of sentiments, not wasting one’s energies in futile
efforts to destroy them’1. The most cherished ideas of the
humanitarians were often loudly acclaimed by their deadliest
enemies, who in this way penetrated into the humanitarian camp
under the guise of allies, causing disunion and thorough confusion.
This strategy has often been highly successful, as is shown by the
fact that many genuine humanitarians still revere Plato’s idea of
‘justice’, the medieval idea of ‘Christian’ authoritarianism,
Rousseau’s idea of the ‘general will’, or Fichte’s and Hegel’s ideas
of ‘national freedom’.2 Yet this method of penetrating, dividing
and confusing the humanitarian camp and of building up a largely

unwitting and therefore doubly effective intellectual fifth column
achieved its greatest success only after Hegelianism had
established itself as the basis of a truly humanitarian movement: of
Marxism, so far the purest, the most developed and the most
dangerous form of historicism.
It is tempting to dwell upon the similarities between Marxism,
the Hegelian left wing, and its fascist counterpart. Yet it would be
utterly unfair to overlook the difference between them. Although
their intellectual origin is nearly identical, there can be no doubt of
the humanitarian impulse of Marxism. Moreover, in contrast to the
Hegelians of the right wing, Marx made an honest attempt to apply
rational methods to the most urgent problems of social life. The
value of this attempt is unimpaired by the fact that it was, as I shall
try to show, largely unsuccessful.
Science progresses through trial and error. Marx tried, and
although he erred in his main doctrines, he did not try in vain. He
opened and sharpened our eyes in many ways. A return to preMarxian social science is inconceivable. All modern writers are
indebted to Marx, even if they do not know it. This is especially
true of those who disagree with his doctrines, as I do; and I readily
admit that my treatment, for example of Plato3 and Hegel, bears the
stamp of his influence.
One cannot do justice to Marx without recognizing his
sincerity. His open-mindedness, his sense of facts, his distrust of
verbiage, and especially of moralizing verbiage, made him one of
the world’s most influential fighters against hypocrisy and
pharisaism. He had a burning desire to help the oppressed, and was
fully conscious of the need for proving himself in deeds, and not
only in words. His main talents being theoretical, he devoted
immense labour to forging what he believed to be scientific
weapons for the fight to improve the lot of the vast majority of
men. His sincerity in his search for truth and his intellectual
honesty distinguish him, I believe, from many of his followers
(although unfortunately he did not altogether escape the corrupting
influence of an upbringing in the atmosphere of Hegelian
dialectics, described by Schopenhauer as ‘destructive of all
intelligence’4). Marx’s interest in social science and social
philosophy was fundamentally a practical interest. He saw in
knowledge a means of promoting the progress of man5. Why, then,
attack Marx? In spite of his merits, Marx was, I believe, a false
prophet. He was a prophet of the course of history, and his

prophecies did not come true; but this is not my main accusation. It
is much more important that he misled scores of intelligent people
into believing that historical prophecy is the scientific way of
approaching social problems. Marx is responsible for the
devastating influence of the historicist method of thought within
the ranks of those who wish to advance the cause of the open
society.
But is it true that Marxism is a pure brand of historicism? Are
there not some elements of social technology in Marxism? The fact
that Russia is making bold and often successful experiments in
social engineering has led many to infer that Marxism, as the
science or creed which underlies the Russian experiment, must be
a kind of social technology, or at least favourable to it. But nobody
who knows anything about the history of Marxism can make this
mistake. Marxism is a purely historical theory, a theory which aims
at predicting the future course of economic and power-political
developments and especially of revolutions. As such, it certainly
did not furnish the basis of the policy of the Russian Communist
Party after its rise to political power. Since Marx had practically
forbidden all social technology, which he denounced as Utopian6,
his Russian disciples found themselves at first entirely unprepared
for their great tasks in the field of social engineering. As Lenin was
quick to realize, Marxism was unable to help in matters of practical
economics. ‘I do not know of any socialist who has dealt with
these problems’, said Lenin7, after his rise to power; ‘there was
nothing written about such matters in the Bolshevik textbooks, or
in those of the Mensheviks.’ After a period of unsuccessful
experiment, the so-called ‘period of war-communism’, Lenin
decided to adopt measures which meant in fact a limited and
temporary return to private enterprise. This so-called NEP (New
Economic Policy) and the later experiments—five-year plans,
etc.—have nothing whatever to do with the theories of ‘Scientific
Socialism’ once propounded by Marx and Engels. Neither the
peculiar situation in which Lenin found himself before he
introduced the NEP, nor his achievements, can be appreciated
without due consideration of this point. The vast economic
researches of Marx did not even touch the problems of a
constructive economic policy, for example, economic planning. As
Lenin admits, there is hardly a word on the economics of socialism
to be found in Marx’s work—apart from such useless8 slogans as
‘from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs’.

The reason is that the economic research of Marx is completely
subservient to his historical prophecy. But we must say even more.
Marx strongly emphasized the opposition between his purely
historicist method and any attempt to make an economic analysis
with a view to rational planning. Such attempts he denounced as
Utopian, and as illegitimate. In consequence, Marxists did not even
study what the so-called ‘bourgeois economists’ attained in this
field. They were by their training even less prepared for
constructive work than some of the ‘bourgeois economists’
themselves.
Marx saw his specific mission in the freeing of socialism from
its sentimental, moralist, and visionary background. Socialism was
to be developed from its Utopian stage to its scientific stage9; it
was to be based upon the scientific method of analysing cause and
effect, and upon scientific prediction. And since he assumed
prediction in the field of society to be the same as historical
prophecy, scientific socialism was to be based upon a study of
historical causes and historical effects, and finally upon the
prophecy of its own advent.
Marxists, when they find their theories attacked, often
withdraw to the position that Marxism is primarily not so much a
doctrine as a method. They say that even if some particular part of
the doctrines of Marx, or of some of his followers, were
superseded, his method would still remain unassailable. I believe
that it is quite correct to insist that Marxism is, fundamentally, a
method. But it is wrong to believe that, as a method, it must be
secure from attacks. The position is, simply, that whoever wishes
to judge Marxism has to probe it and to criticize it as a method,
that is to say, he must measure it by methodological standards. He
must ask whether it is a fruitful method or a poor one, i.e. whether
or not it is capable of furthering the task of science. The standards
by which we must judge the Marxist method are thus of a practical
nature. By describing Marxism as purest historicism, I have
indicated that I hold the Marxist method to be very poor indeed10.
Marx himself would have agreed with such a practical
approach to the criticism of his method, for he was one of the first
philosophers to develop the views which later were called
‘pragmatism’. He was led to this position, I believe, by his
conviction that a scientific background was urgently needed by the
practical politician, which of course meant the socialist politician.
Science, he taught, should yield practical results. Always look at

the fruits, the practical consequences of a theory! They tell
something even of its scientific structure. A philosophy or a
science that does not yield practical results merely interprets the
world we live in; but it can and it should do more; it should change
the world. ‘The philosophers’, wrote Marx11 early in his career,
‘have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point
however is to change it.’ It was perhaps this pragmatic attitude that
made him anticipate the important methodological doctrine of the
later pragmatists that the most characteristic task of science is not
to gain knowledge of past facts, but to predict the future.
This stress on scientific prediction, in itself an important and
progressive methodological discovery, unfortunately led Marx
astray. For the plausible argument that science can predict the
future only if the future is predetermined—if, as it were, the future
is present in the past, telescoped in it—led him to adhere to the
false belief that a rigidly scientific method must be based on a rigid
determinism. Marx’s ‘inexorable laws’ of nature and of historical
development show clearly the influence of the Laplacean
atmosphere and that of the French Materialists. But the belief that
the terms ‘scientific’ and ‘determinist’ are, if not synonymous, at
least inseparably connected, can now be said to be one of the
superstitions of a time that has not yet entirely passed away12.
Since I am interested mainly in questions of method, I am glad
that, when discussing its methodological aspect, it is quite
unnecessary to enter into a dispute concerning the metaphysical
problem of determinism. For whatever may be the outcome of such
metaphysical controversies as, for example, the bearing of the
Quantum theory on ‘freewill’, one thing, I should say, is settled.
No kind of determinism, whether it be expressed as the principle of
the uniformity of nature or as the law of universal causation, can
be considered any longer a necessary assumption of scientific
method; for physics, the most advanced of all sciences, has shown
not only that it can do without such assumptions, but also that to
some extent it contradicts them. Determinism is not a necessary
prerequisite of a science which can make predictions. Scientific
method cannot, therefore, be said to favour the adoption of strict
determinism. Science can be rigidly scientific without this
assumption. Marx, of course, cannot be blamed for having held the
opposite view, since the best scientists of his day did the same.
It must be noted that it is not so much the abstract, theoretical
doctrine of determinism which led Marx astray, but rather the

practical influence of this doctrine upon his view of scientific
method, upon his view of the aims and possibilities of a social
science. The abstract idea of ‘causes’ which’ determine ‘social
developments is as such quite harmless as long as it does not lead
to historicism. And indeed, there is no reason whatever why this
idea should lead us to adopt a historicist attitude towards social
institutions, in strange contrast to the obviously technological
attitude taken up by everybody, and especially by determinists,
towards mechanical or electrical machinery. There is no reason
why we should believe that, of all sciences, social science is
capable of realizing the age-old dream of revealing what the future
has in store for us. This belief in scientific fortune-telling is not
founded on determinism alone; its other foundation is the
confusion between scientific prediction, as we know it from
physics or astronomy, and large-scale historical prophecy, which
foretells in broad lines the main tendencies of the future
development of society. These two kinds of prediction are very
different (as I have tried to show elsewhere13), and the scientific
character of the first is no argument in favour of the scientific
character of the second. Marx’s historicist view of the aims of
social science greatly upset the pragmatism which had originally
led him to stress the predictive function of science. It forced him to
modify his earlier view that science should, and that it could,
change the world. For if there was to be a social science, and
accordingly, historical prophecy, the main course of history must
be predetermined, and neither good-will nor reason had power to
alter it. All that was left to us in the way of reasonable interference
was to make sure, by historical prophecy, of the impending course
of development, and to remove the worst obstacles in its path.
‘When a society has discovered’, Marx writes in Capital14, ‘the
natural law that determines its own movement, . . even then it can
neither overleap the natural phases of its evolution, nor shuffle
them out of the world by a stroke of the pen. But this much it can
do; it can shorten and lessen its birth-pangs.’ These are the views
that led Marx to denounce as ‘Utopianists’ all who looked upon
social institutions with the eyes of the social engineer, holding
them to be amenable to human reason and will, and to be a
possible field of rational planning. These ‘Utopianists’ appeared to
him to attempt with fragile human hands to steer the colossal ship
of society against the natural currents and storms of history. All a
scientist could do, he thought, was to forecast the gusts and

vortices ahead. The practical service he could achieve would thus
be confined to issuing a warning against the next storm that
threatened to take the ship off the right, course (the right course
was of course the left!) or to advising the passengers as to the side
of the boat on which they had better assemble. Marx saw the real
task of scientific socialism in the annunciation of the impending
socialist millennium. Only by way of this annunciation, he holds,
can scientific socialist teaching contribute to bringing about a
socialist world, whose coming it can further by making men
conscious of the impending change, and of the parts allotted to
them in the play of history. Thus scientific socialism is not a social
technology; it does not teach the ways and means of constructing
socialist institutions. Marx’s views of the relation between socialist
theory and practice show the purity of his historicist views.
Marx’s thought was in many respects a product of his time,
when the remembrance of that great historical earthquake, the
French Revolution, was still fresh. (It was revived by the
revolution of 1848.) Such a revolution could not, he felt, be
planned and staged by human reason. But it could have been
foreseen by a historicist social science; sufficient insight into the
social situation would have revealed its causes. That this historicist
attitude was rather typical of the period can be seen from the close
similarity between the historicism of Marx and that of J. S. Mill. (It
is analogous to the similarity between the historicist philosophies
of their predecessors, Hegel and Comte.) Marx did not think very
highly of ‘bourgeois economists such as .. J. S. Mill’15 whom he
viewed as a typical representative of ‘an insipid, brainless
syncretism’. Although it is true that in some places Marx shows a
certain respect for the ‘modern tendencies’ of the ‘philanthropic
economist’ Mill, it scents to me that there is ample circumstantial
evidence against the conjecture that Marx was directly influenced
by Mill’s (or rather by Comte’s) views on the methods of social
science. The agreement between the views of Marx and of Mill is
therefore the more striking. Thus when Marx says in the preface to
Capital, ‘It is the ultimate aim of this work to lay bare the .. law of
motion of modern society’16, he might be said to carry out Mill’s
programme: ‘The fundamental problem .. of the social science, is
to find the law according to which any state of society produces the
state which succeeds it and takes its place.’ Mill distinguished
fairly clearly the possibility of what he called ‘two kinds of
sociological inquiry’, the first closely corresponding to what I call

social technology, the second corresponding to historicist
prophecy, and he took sides with the latter, characterizing it as the
‘general Science of Society by which the conclusions of the other
and more special kind of inquiry must be limited and controlled’.
This general science of society is based upon the principle of
causality, in accordance with Mill’s view of scientific method; and
he describes this causal analysis of society as the ‘Historical
Method’. Mill’s ‘states of society’17 with ‘properties .. changeable
.. from age to age’ correspond exactly to Marxist ‘historical
periods’, and Mill’s optimistic belief in progress resembles Marx’s,
although it is of course much more naive than its dialectical
counterpart. (Mill thought that the type of movement ‘to which
human affairs must conform .. must be .. one or the other’ of two
possible astronomical movements, viz., ‘an orbit’ or ‘a trajectory’.
Marxist dialectics is less certain of the simplicity of the laws of
historical development; it adopts a combination, as it were, of
Mill’s two movements—something like a wave or a corkscrew
movement.)
There are more similarities between Marx and Mill; for
example, both were dissatisfied with laissez faire liberalism, and
both tried to provide better foundations for carrying into practice
the fundamental idea of liberty. But in their views on the method
of sociology, there is one very important difference. Mill believed
that the study of society, in the last analysis, must be reducible to
psychology; that the laws of historical development must be
explicable in terms of human nature, of the ‘laws of the mind’, and
in particular, of its progressiveness. ‘The progressiveness of the
human race’, says Mill, ‘is the foundation on which a method of ..
social science has been .. erected, far superior to .. the modes ..
previously .. prevalent ..’18 The theory that sociology must in
principle be reducible to social psychology, difficult though the
reduction may be because of the complications arising from the
interaction of countless individuals, has been widely held by many
thinkers; indeed, it is one of the theories which are often simply
taken for granted. I shall call this approach to sociology
(methodological) psychologism19. Mill, we can now say, believed
in psychologism. But Marx challenged it. ‘Legal relationships’, he
asserted20, ‘and the various political structures cannot .. be
explained by .. what has been called the general “progressiveness
of the human mind”.’ To have questioned psychologism is perhaps
the greatest achievement of Marx as a sociologist. By doing so he

opened the way to the more penetrating conception of a specific
realm of sociological laws, and of a sociology which was at least
partly autonomous.
In the following chapters, I shall explain some points of Marx’s
method, and I shall try always to emphasize especially such of his
views as I believe to be of lasting merit. Thus I shall deal next with
Marx’s attack on psychologism, i.e. with his arguments in favour
of an autonomous social science, irreducible to psychology. And
only later shall I attempt to show the fatal weakness and the
destructive consequences of his historicism.

Chapter 14: The Autonomy Of Sociology
A concise formulation of Marx’s opposition to psychologism1,
i.e. to the plausible doctrine that all laws of social life must be
ultimately reducible to the psychological laws of human nature’, is
his famous epigram: ‘It is not the consciousness of man that
determines his existence—rather, it is his social existence that
determines his consciousness.’2 The function of the present chapter
as well as of the two following ones is mainly to elucidate this
epigram. And I may state at once that in developing what I believe
to be Marx’s anti-psychologism, I am developing a view to which I
subscribe myself.
As an elementary illustration, and a first step in our
examination, we may refer to the problem of the so-called rules of
exogamy, i.e. the problem of explaining the wide distribution,
among the most diverse cultures, of marriage laws apparently
designed to prevent inbreeding. Mill and his psychologistic school
of sociology (it was joined later by many psychoanalysts) would
try to explain these rules by an appeal to ‘human nature’, for
instance to some sort of instinctive aversion against incest
(developed perhaps through natural selection, or else through
‘repression’); and something like this would also be the naive or
popular explanation. Adopting the point of view expressed in
Marx’s epigram, however, one could ask whether it is not the other
way round, that is to say, whether the apparent instinct is not rather
a product of education, the effect rather than the cause of the social
rules and traditions demanding exogamy and forbidding incest3. It
is clear that these two approaches correspond exactly to the very
ancient problem whether social laws are ‘natural’ or ‘conventional’
(dealt with at length in chapter 5). In a question such as the one
chosen here as an illustration, it would be difficult to determine

which of the two theories is the correct one, the explanation of the
traditional social rules by instinct or the explanation of an apparent
instinct by traditional social rules. The possibility of deciding such
questions by experiment has, however, been shown in a similar
case, that of the apparently instinctive aversion to snakes. This
aversion has a greater semblance of being instinctive or ‘natural’ in
that it is exhibited not only by men but also by all anthropoid apes
and by most monkeys as well. But experiments seem to indicate
that this fear is conventional. It appears to be a product of
education, not only in the human race but also for instance in
chimpanzees, since4 both young children and young chimpanzees
who have not been taught to fear snakes do not exhibit the alleged
instinct. This example should be taken as a warning. We are faced
here with an aversion which is apparently universal, even beyond
the human race. But although from the fact that a habit is not
universal we might perhaps argue against its being based on an
instinct (but even this argument is dangerous since there are social
customs enforcing the suppression of instincts), we see that the
converse is certainly not true. The universal occurrence of a certain
behaviour is not a decisive argument in favour of its instinctive
character, or of its being rooted in ‘human nature’.
Such considerations may show how naive it is to assume that
all social laws must be derivable, in principle, from the psychology
of ‘human nature’. But this analysis is still rather crude. In order to
proceed one step further, we may try to analyse more directly the
main thesis of psychologism, the doctrine that, society being the
product of interacting minds, social laws must ultimately be
reducible to psychological laws, since the events of social life,
including its conventions, must be the outcome of motives
springing from the minds of individual men.
Against this doctrine of psychologism, the defenders of an
autonomous sociology can advance institutionalist views5. They
can point out, first of all, that no action can ever be explained by
motive alone; if motives (or any other psychological or
behaviourist concepts) are to be used in the explanation, then they
must be supplemented by a reference to the general situation, and
especially to the environment. In the case of human actions, this
environment is very largely of a social nature; thus our actions
cannot be explained without reference to our social environment,
to social institutions and to their manner of functioning. It is
therefore impossible, the institutionalist may contend, to reduce

sociology to a psychological or behaviouristic analysis of our
actions; rather, every such analysis presupposes sociology, which
therefore cannot wholly depend on psychological analysis.
Sociology, or at least a very important part of it, must be
autonomous.
Against this view, the followers of psychologism may retort
that they are quite ready to admit the great importance of
environmental factors, whether natural or social; but the structure
(they may prefer the fashionable word ‘pattern’) of the social
environment, as opposed to the natural environment, is man-made;
and therefore it must be explicable in terms of human nature, in
accordance with the doctrine of psychologism. For instance, the
characteristic institution which economists call ‘the market’, and
whose functioning is the main object of their studies, can be
derived in the last analysis from the psychology of ‘economic
man’, or, to use Mill’s phraseology, from the psychological
‘phenomena .. of the pursuit of wealth’6. Moreover, the followers
of psychologism insist that it is because of the peculiar
psychological structure of human nature that institutions play such
an important role in our society, and that, once established, they
show a tendency to become a traditional and a comparatively fixed
part of our environment. Finally—and this is their decisive point—
the origin as well as the development of traditions must be
explicable in terms of human nature. When tracing back traditions
and institutions to their origin, we must find that their introduction
is explicable in psychological terms, since they have been
introduced by man for some purpose or other, and under the
influence of certain motives. And even if these motives have been
forgotten in the course of time, then that forgetfulness, as well as
our readiness to put up with institutions whose purpose is obscure,
is in its turn based on human nature. Thus ‘all phenomena of
society are phenomena of human nature’7, as Mill said; and ‘the
Laws of the phenomena of society are, and can be, nothing but the
laws of the actions and passions of human beings’, that is to say,
‘the laws of individual human nature. Men are not, when brought
together, converted into another kind of substance ..’8
This last remark of Mill’s exhibits one of the most
praiseworthy aspects of psychologism, namely, its sane opposition
to collectivism and holism, its refusal to be impressed by
Rousseau’s or Hegel’s romanticism—by a general will or a
national spirit, or perhaps, by a group mind. Psychologism is, I

believe, correct only in so far as it insists upon what may be called
‘methodological individualism’ as opposed to ‘methodological
collectivism’; it rightly insists that the ‘behaviour’ and the
‘actions’ of collectives, such as states or social groups, must be
reduced to the behaviour and to the actions of human individuals.
But the belief that the choice of such an individualistic method
implies the choice of a psychological method is mistaken (as will
be shown below in this chapter), even though it may appear very
convincing at first sight. And that psychologism as such moves on
rather dangerous ground, apart from its commendable
individualistic method, can be seen from some further passages of
Mill’s argument. For they show that psychologism is forced to
adopt historicist methods. The attempt to reduce the facts of our
social environment to psychological facts forces us into
speculations about origins and developments. When analysing
Plato’s sociology, we had an opportunity of gauging the dubious
merits of such an approach to social science (compare chapter 5).
In criticizing Mill, we shall now try to deal it a decisive blow.
It is undoubtedly Mill’s psychologism which forces him to
adopt a historicist method; and he is even vaguely aware of the
barrenness or poverty of historicism, since he tries to account for
this barrenness by pointing out the difficulties arising from the
tremendous complexity of the interaction of so many individual
minds. ‘While it is .. imperative’, he says, ‘... never to introduce
any generalization .. into the social sciences until sufficient
grounds can be pointed out in human nature, I do not think any one
will contend that it would have been possible, setting out from the
principle of human nature and from the general circumstances of
the position of our species, to determine a priori the order in which
human development must take place, and to predict, consequently,
the general facts of history up to the present time.’9 The reason he
gives is that’ after the first few terms of the series, the influence
exercised over each generation by the generations which preceded
it becomes .. more and more preponderant over all other
influences’. (In other words, the social environment becomes a
dominant influence.) ‘So long a series of actions and reactions ..
could not possibly be computed by human faculties ..’
This argument, and especially Mill’s remark on ‘the first few
terms of the series’, are a striking revelation of the weakness of the
psychologistic version of historicism. If all regularities in social
life, the laws of our social environment, of all institutions, etc., are

ultimately to be explained by, and reduced to, the ‘actions and
passions of human beings’, then such an approach forces upon us
not only the idea of historico-causal development, but also the idea
of the fast steps of such a development. For the stress on the
psychological origin of social rules or institutions can only mean
that they can be traced back to a state when their introduction was
dependent solely upon psychological factors, or more precisely,
when it was independent of any established social institutions.
Psychologism is thus forced, whether it likes it or not, to
operate with the idea of a beginning of society, and with the idea of
a human nature and a human psychology as they existed prior to
society. In other words, Mill’s remark concerning the ‘first few
terms of the series’ of social development is not an accidental slip,
as one might perhaps believe, but the appropriate expression of the
desperate position forced upon him. It is a desperate position
because this theory of a pre-social human nature which explains
the foundation of society—a psychologistic version of the ‘social
contract’—is not only an historical myth but also, as it were, a
methodological myth. It can hardly be seriously discussed, for we
have every reason to believe that man or rather his ancestor was
social prior to being human (considering, for example, that
language presupposes society). But this implies that social
institutions, and with them, typical social regularities or
sociological laws10, must have existed prior to what some people
arc pleased to call ‘human nature’, and to human psychology. If a
reduction is to be attempted at all, it would therefore be more
hopeful to attempt a reduction or interpretation of psychology in
terms of sociology than the other way round. This brings us back
to Marx’s epigram at the beginning of this chapter. Men—i.e.
human minds, the needs, the hopes, fears, and expectations, the
motives and aspirations of human individuals—are, if anything, the
product of life in society rather than its creators. It must be
admitted that the structure of our social environment is man-made
in a certain sense; that its institutions and traditions are neither the
work of God nor of nature, but the results of human actions and
decisions, and alterable by human actions and decisions. But this
does not mean that they are all consciously designed, and
explicable in terms of needs, hopes, or motives. On the contrary,
even those which arise as the result of conscious and intentional
human actions are, as a rule, the indirect, the unintended and often
the unwanted byproducts of such actions. ‘Only a minority of

social institutions are consciously designed, while the vast majority
have just “grown”, as the undesigned results of human actions’, as
I have said before11; and we can add that even most of the few
institutions which were consciously and successfully designed
(say, a newly founded University, or a Trade Union) do not turn
out according to plan—again because of the unintended social
repercussions resulting from their intentional creation. For their
creation affects not only many other social institutions but also
‘human nature’—hopes, fears, and ambitions, first of those more
immediately involved, and later often of all members of the
society. One of the consequences of this is that the moral values of
a society—the demands and proposals recognized by all, or by
very nearly all, of its members—are closely bound up with its
institutions and traditions, and that they cannot survive the
destruction of the institutions and traditions of a society (as
indicated in chapter 9 when we discussed the ‘canvas-cleaning’ of
the radical revolutionary).
All this holds most emphatically for the more ancient periods
of social development, i.e. for the closed society, in which the
conscious design of institutions is a most exceptional event, if it
happens at all. To-day, things may begin to be different, owing to
our slowly increasing knowledge of society, i.e. owing to the study
of the unintended repercussions of our plans and actions; and one
day, men may even become the conscious creators of an open
society, and thereby of a greater part of their own fate. (Marx
entertained this hope, as will be shown in the next chapter.) But all
this is partly a matter of degree, and although we may learn to
foresee many of the unintended consequences of our actions (the
main aim of all social technology), there will always be many
which we did not foresee.
The fact that psychologism is forced to operate with the idea of
a psychological origin of society constitutes in my opinion a
decisive argument against it. But it is not the only one. Perhaps the
most important criticism of psychologism is that it fails to
understand the main task of the explanatory social sciences. This
task is not, as the historicist believes, the prophecy of the future
course of history. It is, rather, the discovery and explanation of the
less obvious dependences within the social sphere. It is the
discovery of the difficulties which stand in the way of social
action—the study, as it were, of the unwieldiness, the resilience or

the brittleness of the social stuff, of its resistance to our attempts to
mould it and to work with it.
In order to make my point clear, I shall briefly describe a
theory which is widely held but which assumes what I consider the
very opposite of the true aim of the social sciences; I call it the
‘conspiracy theory of society’. It is the view that an explanation of
a social phenomenon consists in the discovery of the men or
groups who are interested in the occurrence of this phenomenon
(sometimes it is a hidden interest which has first to be revealed),
and who have planned and conspired to bring it about. This view
of the aims of the social sciences arises, of course from the
mistaken theory that, whatever happens in society—especially
happenings such as war, unemployment, poverty, shortages, which
people as a rule dislike—is the result of direct design by some
powerful individuals and groups. This theory is widely held; it is
older even than historicism (which, as shown by its primitive
theistic form, is a derivative of the conspiracy theory). In its
modern forms it is, like modern historicism, and a certain modern
attitude towards ‘natural laws’, a typical result of the secularization
of a religious superstition. The belief in the Homeric gods whose
conspiracies explain the history of the Trojan War is gone. The
gods are abandoned. But their place is filled by powerful men or
groups—sinister pressure groups whose wickedness is responsible
for all the evils we suffer from—such as the Learned Elders of
Zion, or the monopolists, or the capitalists, or the imperialists.
I do not wish to imply that conspiracies never happen. On the
contrary, they are typical social phenomena. They become
important, for example, whenever people who believe in the
conspiracy theory get into power. And people who sincerely
believe that they know how to make heaven on earth are most
likely to adopt the conspiracy theory, and to get involved in a
counter-conspiracy against non-existing conspirators. For the only
explanation of their failure to produce their heaven is the evil
intention of the Devil, who has a vested interest in hell.
Conspiracies occur, it must be admitted. But the striking fact
which, in spite of their occurrence, disproves the conspiracy theory
is that few of these conspiracies are ultimately successful.
Conspirators rarely consummate their conspiracy.
Why is this so? Why do achievements differ so widely from
aspirations? Because this is usually the case in social life,
conspiracy or no conspiracy. Social life is not only a trial of

strength between opposing groups: it is action within a more or
less resilient or brittle framework of institutions and traditions, and
it creates—apart from any conscious counter-action—many
unforeseen reactions in this framework, some of them perhaps
even unforeseeable.
To try to analyse these reactions and to foresee them as far as
possible is, I believe, the main task of the social sciences. It is the
task of analysing the unintended social repercussions of intentional
human actions—those repercussions whose significance is
neglected both by the conspiracy theory and by psychologism, as
already indicated. An action which proceeds precisely according to
intention does not create a problem for social science (except that
there may be a need to explain why in this particular case no
unintended repercussions occurred). One of the most primitive
economic actions may serve as an example in order to make the
idea of unintended consequences of our actions quite clear. If a
man wishes urgently to buy a house, we can safely assume that he
does not wish to raise the market price of houses. But the very fact
that he appears on the market as a buyer will tend to raise market
prices. And analogous remarks hold for the seller. Or to take an
example from a very different field, if a man decides to insure his
life, he is unlikely to have the intention of encouraging some
people to invest their money in insurance shares. But he will do so
nevertheless. We see here clearly that not all consequences of our
actions are intended consequences; and accordingly, that the
conspiracy theory of society cannot be true because it amounts to
the assertion that all results, even those which at first sight do not
seem to be intended by anybody, are the intended results of the
actions of people who are interested in these results.
The examples given do not refute psychologism as easily as
they refute the conspiracy theory, for one can argue that it is the
sellers’ knowledge of a buyer’s presence in the market, and their
hope of getting a higher price—in other words, psychological
factors—which explain the repercussions described. This, of
course, is quite true; but we must not forget that this knowledge
and this hope are not ultimate data of human nature, and that they
are, in their turn, explicable in terms of the social situation—the
market situation.
This social situation is hardly reducible to motives and to the
general laws of ‘human nature’. Indeed, the interference of certain
‘traits of human nature’, such as our susceptibility to propaganda,

may sometimes lead to deviations from the economic behaviour
just mentioned. Furthermore, if the social situation is different
from the one envisaged, then it is possible that the consumer, by
the action of buying, may indirectly contribute to a cheapening of
the article; for instance, by making its mass-production more
profitable. And although this effect happens to further his interest
as a consumer, it may have been caused just as involuntarily as the
opposite effect, and altogether under precisely similar
psychological conditions. It seems clear that the social situations
which may lead to such widely different unwanted or unintended
repercussions must be studied by a social science which is not
bound to the prejudice that ‘it is imperative never to introduce any
generalization into the social sciences until sufficient grounds can
be pointed out in human nature’, as Mill said12. They must be
studied by an autonomous social science.
Continuing this argument against psychologism we may say
that our actions are to a very large extent explicable in terms of the
situation in which they occur. Of course, they are never fully
explicable in terms of the situation alone; an explanation of the
way in which a man, when crossing a street, dodges the cars which
move on it may go beyond the situation, and may refer his motives,
to an ‘instinct’ of self-preservation, or to his wish to avoid pain,
etc. But this ‘psychological’ part of the explanation is very often
trivial, as compared with the detailed determination of his action
by what we may call the logic of the situation; and besides, it is
impossible to include all psychological factors in the description of
the situation. The analysis of situations, the situational logic, plays
a very important part in social life as well as in the social sciences.
It is, in fact, the method of economic analysis. As to an example
outside economics, I refer to the ‘logic of power’13, which we may
use in order to explain the moves of power politics as well as the
working of certain political institutions. The method of applying a
situational logic to the social sciences is not based on any
psychological assumption concerning the rationality (or otherwise)
of ‘human nature’. On the contrary: when we speak of ‘rational
behaviour’ or of ‘irrational behaviour’ then we mean behaviour
which is, or which is not, in accordance with the logic of that
situation. In fact, the psychological analysis of an action in terms
of its (rational or irrational) motives presupposes—as has been
pointed out by Max Weber14—that we have previously developed

some standard of what is to be considered as rational in the
situation in question.
My arguments against psychologism should not be
misunderstood15. They are not, of course, intended to show that
psychological studies and discoveries are of little importance for
the social scientist. They mean, rather, that psychology—the
psychology of the individual—is one of the social sciences, even
though it is not the basis of all social science. Nobody would deny
the importance for political science of psychological facts such as
the craving for power, and the various neurotic phenomena
connected with it. But ‘craving for power’ is undoubtedly a social
notion as well as a psychological one: we must not forget that, if
we study, for example, the first appearance in childhood of this
craving, then we study it in the setting of a certain social
institution, for example, that of our modern family. (The Eskimo
family may give rise to rather different phenomena.) Another
psychological fact which is significant for sociology, and which
raises grave political and institutional problems, is that to live in
the haven of a tribe, or of a ‘community’ approaching a tribe, is for
many men an emotional necessity (especially for young people
who, perhaps in accordance with a parallelism between
ontogenetic and phylogenetic development, seem to have to pass
through a tribal or ‘American-Indian’ stage). That my attack on
psychologism is not intended as an attack on all psychological
considerations may be seen from the use I have made (in chapter
10) of such a concept as the ‘strain of civilization’ which is partly
the result of this unsatisfied emotional need. This concept refers to
certain feelings of uneasiness, and is therefore a psychological
concept. But at the same time, it is a sociological concept also; for
it characterizes these feelings not only as unpleasant and
unsettling, etc., but relates them to a certain social situation, and to
the contrast between an open and a closed society. (Many
psychological concepts such as ambition or love have an analogous
status.) Also, we must not overlook the great merits which
psychologism has acquired by advocating a methodological
individualism and by opposing a methodological collectivism; for
it lends support to the important doctrine that all social
phenomena, and especially the functioning of all social institutions,
should always be understood as resulting from the decisions,
actions, attitudes, etc., of human individuals, and that we should
never be satisfied by an explanation in terms of so-called

‘collectives’ (states, nations, races, etc.). The mistake of
psychologism is its presumption that this methodological
individualism in the field of social science implies the programme
of reducing all social phenomena and all social regularities to
psychological phenomena and psychological laws. The danger of
this presumption is its inclination towards historicism, as we have
seen. That it is unwarranted is shown by the need for a theory of
the unintended social repercussions of our actions, and by the need
for what I have described as the logic of social situations.
In defending and developing Marx’s view that the problems of
society are irreducible to those of ‘human nature’, I have permitted
myself to go beyond the arguments actually propounded by Marx.
Marx did not speak of ‘psychologism’, nor did he criticize it
systematically; nor was it Mill whom he had in mind in the
epigram quoted at the beginning of this chapter. The force of this
epigram is directed, rather, against ‘idealism’ in its Hegelian form.
Yet so far as the problem of the psychological nature of society is
concerned, Mill’s psychologism can be said to coincide with the
idealist theory combated by Marx16. As it happened, however, it
was just the influence of another element in Hegelianism, namely
Hegel’s Platonizing collectivism, his theory that the state and the
nation is more ‘real’ than the individual who owes everything to
them, that led Marx to the view expounded in this chapter. (An
instance of the fact that one can sometimes extract a valuable
suggestion even from an absurd philosophical theory.) Thus,
historically, Marx developed certain of Hegel’s views concerning
the superiority of society over the individual, and used them as
arguments against other views of Hegel. Yet since I consider Mill a
worthier opponent than Hegel, I have not kept to the history of
Marx’s ideas, but have tried to develop them in the form of an
argument against Mill.

Chapter 15: Economic Historicism
To see Marx presented in this way, that is to say, as an
opponent of any psychological theory of society, may possibly
surprise some Marxists as well as some Anti-Marxists. For there
seem to be many who believe in a very different story. Marx, they
think, taught the all-pervading influence of the economic motive in
the life of men; he succeeded in explaining its overpowering
strength by showing that ‘man’s overmastering need was to get the
means of living’1; he thus demonstrated the fundamental

importance of such categories as the profit motive or the motive of
class interest for the actions not only of individuals but also of
social groups; and he showed how to use these categories for
explaining the course of history. Indeed, they think that the very
essence of Marxism is the doctrine that economic motives and
especially class interest are the driving forces of history, and that it
is precisely this doctrine to which the name ‘materialistic
interpretation of history’ or ‘historical materialism’ alludes, a
name by which Marx and Engels tried to characterize the essence
of their teaching.
Such opinions are very common; but I have no doubt that they
misinterpret Marx. Those who admire him for having held them, I
may call Vulgar Marxists (alluding to the name ‘Vulgar
Economist’ given by Marx to certain of his opponents2). The
average Vulgar Marxist believes that Marxism lays bare the
sinister secrets of social life by revealing the hidden motives of
greed and lust for material gain which actuate the powers behind
the scenes of history; powers that cunningly and consciously create
war, depression, unemployment, hunger in the midst of plenty, and
all the other forms of social misery, in order to gratify their vile
desires for profit. (And the Vulgar Marxist is sometimes seriously
concerned with the problem of reconciling the claims of Marx with
those of Freud and Adler; and if he does not choose the one or the
other of them, he may perhaps decide that hunger, love and lust for
power3 are the Three Great Hidden Motives of Human Nature
brought to light by Marx, Freud, and Adler, the Three Great
Makers of the modern man’s philosophy. . .)
Whether or not such views are tenable and attractive, they
certainly seem to have very little to do with the doctrine which
Marx called ‘historical materialism’. It must be admitted that he
sometimes speaks of such psychological phenomena as greed and
the profit motive, etc., but never in order to explain history. He
interpreted them, rather, as symptoms of the corrupting influence
of the social system, i.e. of a system of institutions developed
during the course of history; as effects rather than causes of
corruption; as repercussions rather than moving forces of history.
Rightly or wrongly, he saw in such phenomena as war, depression,
unemployment, and hunger in the midst of plenty, not the result of
a cunning conspiracy on the part of ‘big business’ or of ‘imperialist
war-mongers’, but the unwanted social consequences of actions,
directed towards different results, by agents who are caught in the

network of the social system. He looked upon the human actors on
the stage of history, including the ‘big’ ones, as mere puppets,
irresistibly pulled by economic wires—by historical forces over
which they have no control. The stage of history, he taught, is set
in a social system which binds us all; it is set in the ‘kingdom of
necessity’. (But one day the puppets will destroy this system and
attain the ‘kingdom of freedom’.)
This doctrine of Marx’s has been abandoned by most of his
followers—perhaps for propagandist reasons, perhaps because they
did not understand him—and a Vulgar Marxist Conspiracy Theory
has very largely replaced the ingenious and highly original
Marxian doctrine. It is a sad intellectual come-down, this
comedown from the level of Capital to that of The Myth of the
20th Century.
Yet such was Marx’s own philosophy of history, usually called
‘historical materialism’. It will be the main theme of these
chapters. In the present chapter, I shall explain in broad outlines its
‘materialist’ or economic emphasis; after that, I shall discuss in
more detail the role of class war and class interest and the Marxist
conception of a ‘social system’.
I
The exposition of Marx’s economic historicism4 can be
conveniently linked up with our comparison between Marx and
Mill. Marx agrees with Mill in the belief that social phenomena
must be explained historically, and that we must try to understand
any historical period as a historical product of previous
developments. The point where he departs from Mill is, as we have
seen, Mill’s psychologism (corresponding to Hegel’s idealism).
This is replaced in Marx’s teaching by what he calls materialism.
Much has been said about Marx’s materialism that is quite
untenable. The often repeated claim that Marx does not recognize
anything beyond the ‘lower’ or ‘material’ aspects of human life is
an especially ridiculous distortion. (It is another repetition of that
most ancient of all reactionary libels against the defenders of
freedom, Heraclitus’ slogan that ‘they fill their bellies like the
beasts’5.) But in this sense, Marx cannot be called a materialist at
all, even though he was strongly influenced by the eighteenthcentury French Materialists, and even though he used to call
himself a materialist, which is well in keeping with a good number
of his doctrines. For there are some important passages which can

hardly be interpreted as materialistic. The truth is, I think, that he
was not much concerned with purely philosophical issues—less
than Engels or Lenin, for instance—and that it was mainly the
sociological and methodological side of the problem in which he
was interested.
There is a well-known passage in Capital6, where Marx says
that ‘in Hegel’s writing, dialectics stands on its head; one must turn
it the right way up again ..’ Its tendency is clear. Marx wished to
show that the ‘head’, i.e. human thought, is not itself the basis of
human life but rather a kind of superstructure, on a physical basis.
A similar tendency is expressed in the passage: ‘The ideal is
nothing other than the material when it has been transposed and
translated inside the human head.’ But it has not, perhaps, been
sufficiently recognized that these passages do not exhibit a radical
form of materialism; rather, they indicate a certain leaning towards
a dualism of body and mind. It is, so to speak, a practical dualism.
Although, theoretically, mind was to Marx apparently only another
form (or another aspect, or perhaps an epiphenomenon) of matter,
in practice it is different from matter, since it is another form of it.
The passages quoted indicate that although our feet have to be
kept, as it were, on the firm ground of the material world, our
heads—and Marx thought highly of human heads—are concerned
with thoughts or ideas. In my opinion, Marxism and its influence
cannot be appreciated unless we recognize this dualism.
Marx loved freedom, real freedom (not Hegel’s ‘real
freedom’). And as far as I am able to see he followed Hegel’s
famous equation, of freedom with spirit, in so far as he believed
that we can be free only as spiritual beings. At the same time he
recognized in practice (as a practical dualist) that we are spirit and
flesh, and, realistically enough, that the flesh is the fundamental
one of these two. This is why he turned against Hegel, and why he
said that Hegel puts things upside down. But although he
recognized that the material world and its necessities are
fundamental, he did not feel any love for the ‘kingdom of
necessity’, as he called a society which is in bondage to its material
needs. He cherished the spiritual world, the ‘kingdom of freedom’,
and the spiritual side of human nature’, as much as any Christian
dualist; and in his writings there are even traces of hatred and
contempt for the material. What follows may show that this
interpretation of Marx’s views can be supported by his own text.

In a passage of the third volume of Capital7, Marx very aptly
describes the material side of social life, and especially its
economic side, that of production and consumption, as an
extension of human metabolism, i.e. of man’s exchange of matter
with nature. He clearly states that our freedom must always be
limited by the necessities of this metabolism. All that can be
achieved in the direction of making us more free, he says, is ‘to
conduct this metabolism rationally, .. with a minimum expenditure
of energy and under conditions most dignified and adequate to
human nature. Yet it will still remain the kingdom of necessity.
Only outside and beyond it can that development of human
faculties begin which constitutes an end in itself—the true
kingdom of freedom. But this can flourish only on the ground
occupied by the kingdom of necessity, which remains its basis ..’
Immediately before this, Marx says: ‘The kingdom of freedom
actually begins only where drudgery, enforced by hardship and by
external purposes, ends; it thus lies, quite naturally, beyond the
sphere of proper material production.’ And he ends the whole
passage by drawing a practical conclusion which clearly shows
that it was his sole aim to open the way into that non-materialist
kingdom of freedom for all men alike: ‘The shortening of the
labour day is the fundamental prerequisite.’
In my opinion this passage leaves no doubt regarding what I
have called the dualism of Marx’s practical view of life. With
Hegel he thinks that freedom is the aim of historical development.
With Hegel he identifies the realm of freedom with that of man’s
mental life. But he recognizes that we are not purely spiritual
beings; that we are not fully free, nor capable of ever achieving full
freedom, unable as we shall always be to emancipate ourselves
entirely from the necessities of our metabolism, and thus from
productive toil. All we can achieve is to improve upon the
exhausting and undignified conditions of labour, to make them
more worthy of man, to equalize them, and to reduce drudgery to
such an extent that all of us can be free for some part of our lives.
This, I believe, is the central idea of Marx’s ‘view of life’; central
also in so far as it seems to me to be the most influential of his
doctrines.
With this view, we must now combine the methodological
determinism which has been discussed above (in chapter 13).
According to this doctrine, the scientific treatment of society, and
scientific historical prediction, are possible only in so far as society

is determined by its past. But this implies that science can deal
only with the kingdom of necessity. If it were possible for men
ever to become perfectly free, then historical prophecy, and with it,
social science, would come to an end. ‘Free’ spiritual activity as
such, if it existed, would lie beyond the reach of science, which
must always ask for causes, for determinants. It can therefore deal
with our mental life only in so far as our thoughts and ideas are
caused or determined or necessitated by the ‘kingdom of
necessity’, by the material, and especially by the economic
conditions of our life, by our metabolism. Thoughts and ideas can
be treated scientifically only by considering, on the one hand, the
material conditions under which they originated, i.e. the economic
conditions of the life of the men who originated them, and on the
other hand, the material conditions under which they were
assimilated, i.e. the economic conditions of the men who adopted
them. Hence from the scientific or causal point of view, thoughts
and ideas must be treated as ‘ideological superstructures on the
basis of economic conditions’. Marx, in opposition to Hegel,
contended that the clue to history, even to the history of ideas, is to
be found in the development of the relations between man and his
natural environment, the material world; that is to say, in his
economic life, and not in his spiritual life. This is why we may
describe Marx’s brand of historicism as economism, as opposed to
Hegel’s idealism or to Mill’s psychologism. But it signifies a
complete misunderstanding if we identify Marx’s economism with
that kind of materialism which implies a depreciatory attitude
towards man’s mental life. Marx’s vision of the ‘kingdom of
freedom’, i.e. of a partial but equitable liberation of men from the
bondage of their material nature, might rather be described as
idealistic. Considered in this way, the Marxist view of life appears
to be consistent enough; and I believe that such apparent
contradictions and difficulties as have been found in its partly
determinist and partly libertarian view of human activities
disappear.
II
The bearing of what I have called Marx’s dualism and his
scientific determinism on his view of history is plain. Scientific
history, which to him is identical with social science as a whole,
must explore the laws according to which man’s exchange of
matter with nature develops. Its central task must be the

explanation of the development of the conditions of production.
Social relationships have historical and scientific significance only
in proportion to the degree in which they are bound up with the
productive process—affecting it, or perhaps affected by it. ‘Just as
the savage must wrestle with nature in order to satisfy his needs, to
keep alive, and to reproduce, so must the civilized man; and he
must continue to do so in all forms of society and under all
possible forms of production. This kingdom of necessity expands
with its development, and so does the range of human needs. Yet at
the same time, there is an expansion of the productive forces which
satisfy these needs.’8 This, in brief, is Marx’s view of man’s
history.
Similar views are expressed by Engels. The expansion of
modern means of production, according to Engels, has created ‘for
the first time .. the possibility of securing for every member of
society .. an existence not only .. sufficient from a material point of
view, but also .. warranting the .. development and exercise of his
physical and mental faculties’9. With this, freedom becomes
possible, i.e. the emancipation from the flesh. ‘At this point .. man
finally cuts himself off from the animal world, leaves .. animal
existence behind him and enters conditions which are really
human.’ Man is in fetters exactly in so far as he is dominated by
economics; when ‘the domination of the product over producers
disappears .. , man .. becomes, for the first time, the conscious and
real master of nature, by becoming master of his own social
environment .. Not until then will man himself, in full
consciousness, make his own history .. It is humanity’s leap from
the realm of necessity into the realm of freedom.’
If now again we compare Marx’s version of historicism with
that of Mill, then we find that Marx’s economism can easily solve
the difficulty which I have shown to be fatal to Mill’s
psychologism. I have in mind the rather monstrous doctrine of a
beginning of society which can be explained in psychological
terms—a doctrine which I have described as the psychologistic
version of the social contract. This idea has no parallel in Marx’s
theory. To replace the priority of psychology by the priority of
economics creates no analogous difficulty, since ‘economics’
covers man’s metabolism, the exchange of matter between man
and nature. Whether this metabolism has always been socially
organized, even in pre-human times, or whether it was once
dependent solely on the individual, can be left an open question.

No more is assumed than that the science of society must coincide
with the history of the development of the economic conditions of
society, usually called by Marx ‘the conditions of production’.
It may be noted, in parentheses, that the Marxist term
‘production’ was certainly intended to be used in a wide sense,
covering the whole economic process, including distribution and
consumption. But these latter never received much attention from
Marx and the Marxists. Their prevailing interest remained
production in the narrow sense of the word. This is just another
example of the naive historico-genetic attitude, of the belief that
science must only ask for causes, so that, even in the realm of manmade things, it must ask ‘Who has made it?’ and ‘What is it made
of?’ rather than ‘Who is going to use it?’ and ‘What is it made
for?’
III
If we now proceed to a criticism as well as to an appreciation
of Marx’s ‘historical materialism’, or of so much of it as has been
presented so far, then we may distinguish two different aspects.
The first is historicism, the claim that the realm of social sciences
coincides with that of the historical or evolutionary method, and
especially with historical prophecy. This claim, I think, must be
dismissed. The second is economism (or ‘materialism’), i.e. the
claim that the economic organization of society, the organization
of our exchange of matter with nature, is fundamental for all social
institutions and especially for their historical development. This
claim, I believe, is perfectly sound, so long as we take the term
‘fundamental’ in an ordinary vague sense, not laying too much
stress upon it. In other words, there can be no doubt that practically
all social studies, whether institutional or historical, may profit if
they are carried out with an eye to the ‘economic conditions’ of
society. Even the history of an abstract science such as
mathematics is no exception10.’ In this sense, Marx’s economism
can be said to represent an extremely valuable advance in the
methods of social science.
But, as I said before, we must not take the term ‘fundamental’
too seriously. Marx himself undoubtedly did so. Owing to his
Hegelian upbringing, he was influenced by the ancient distinction
between ‘reality’ and ‘appearance’, and by the corresponding
distinction between what is ‘essential’ and what is ‘accidental’. His
own improvement upon Hegel (and Kant) he was inclined to see in

the identification of ‘reality’ with the material world11 (including
man’s metabolism), and of ‘appearance’ with the world of thoughts
or ideas. Thus all thoughts and ideas would have to be explained
by reducing them to the underlying essential reality, i.e. to
economic conditions. This philosophical view is certainly not
much better12 than any other form of essentialism. And its
repercussions in the field of method must result in an overemphasis upon economism. For although the general importance
of Marx’s economism can hardly be overrated, it is very easy to
overrate the importance of the economic conditions in any
particular case. Some knowledge of economic conditions may
contribute considerably, for example, to a history of the problems
of mathematics, but a knowledge of the problems of mathematics
themselves is much more important for that purpose; and it is even
possible to write a very good history of mathematical problems
without referring at all to their ‘economic background’. (In my
opinion, the ‘economic conditions’ or the ‘social relations’ of
science are themes which can easily be overdone, and which are
liable to degenerate into platitude.)
This, however, is only a minor example of the danger of overstressing economism. Often it is sweepingly interpreted as the
doctrine that all social development depends upon that of
economic conditions, and especially upon the development of the
physical means of production. But such a doctrine is palpably
false. There is an interaction between economic conditions and
ideas, and not simply a unilateral dependence of the latter on the
former. If anything, we might even assert that certain ‘ideas’, those
which constitute our knowledge, are more fundamental than the
more complex material means of production, as may be seen from
the following consideration. Imagine that our economic system,
including all machinery and all social organizations, was destroyed
one day, but that technical and scientific knowledge was preserved.
In such a case it might conceivably not take very long before it was
reconstructed (on a smaller scale, and after many had starved). But
imagine all knowledge of these matters to disappear, while the
material things were preserved. This would be tantamount to what
would happen if a savage tribe occupied a highly industrialized but
deserted country. It would soon lead to the complete disappearance
of all the material relics of civilization.
It is ironical that the history of Marxism itself furnishes an
example that clearly falsifies this exaggerated economism. Marx’s

idea ‘Workers of all countries, unite!’ was of the greatest
significance down to the eve of the Russian Revolution, and it had
its influence upon economic conditions. But with the revolution,
the situation became very difficult, simply because, as Lenin
himself admitted, there were no further constructive ideas. (See
chapter 13.) Then Lenin had some new ideas which may be briefly
summarized in the slogan: ‘Socialism is the dictatorship of the
proletariat, plus the widest introduction of the most modern
electrical machinery.’ It was this new idea that became the basis of
a development which changed the whole economic and material
background of one-sixth of the world. In a fight against
tremendous odds, uncounted material difficulties were overcome,
uncounted material sacrifices were made, in order to alter, or
rather, to build up from nothing, the conditions of production. And
the driving power of this development was the enthusiasm for an
idea. This example shows that in certain circumstances, ideas may
revolutionize the economic conditions of a country, instead of
being moulded by these conditions. Using Marx’s terminology, we
could say that he had underrated the power of the kingdom of
freedom and its chances of conquering the kingdom of necessity.
The glaring contrast between the development of the Russian
Revolution and Marx’s metaphysical theory of an economic reality
and its ideological appearance can best be seen from the following
passages: ‘In considering such revolutions’, Marx writes, ‘it is
necessary always to distinguish between the material revolution in
the economic conditions of production, which fall within the scope
of exact scientific determination, and the juridical, political,
religious, aesthetic, or philosophic—in a word, ideological forms
of appearance ..’13 In Marx’s view, it is vain to expect that any
important change can be achieved by the use of legal or political
means; a political revolution can only lead to one set of rulers
giving way to another set—a mere exchange of the persons who
act as rulers. Only the evolution of the underlying essence, the
economic reality, can produce any essential or real change—a
social revolution. And only when such a social revolution has
become a reality, only then can a political revolution be of any
significance. But even in this case, the political revolution is only
the outward expression of the essential or real change that has
occurred before. In accordance with this theory, Marx asserts that
every social revolution develops in the following way. The
material conditions of production grow and mature until they begin

to conflict with the social and legal relations, outgrowing them like
clothes, until they burst. ‘Then an epoch of social revolution
opens’, Marx writes. ‘With the change in the economic foundation,
the whole vast superstructure is more or less rapidly transformed ..
New, more highly productive relationships’ (within the
superstructure) ‘never come into being before the material
conditions for their existence have been brought to maturity within
the womb of the old society itself.’ In view of this statement, it is, I
believe, impossible to identify the Russian Revolution with the
social revolution prophesied by Marx; it has, in fact, no similarity
with it whatever14.
It may be noted in this connection that Marx’s friend, the poet
H. Heine, thought very differently about these matters. ‘Mark this,
ye proud men of action’, he writes; ‘ye are nothing but
unconscious instruments of the men of thought who, often in
humblest seclusion, have appointed you to your inevitable task.
Maximilian Robespierre was merely the hand of Jean-Jacques
Rousseau ..’15 (Something like this might perhaps be said of the
relationship between Lenin and Marx.) We see that Heine was, in
Marx’s terminology, an idealist, and that he applied his idealistic
interpretation of history to the French Revolution, which was one
of the most important instances used by Marx in favour of his
economism, and which indeed seemed to fit this doctrine not so
badly—especially if we compare it now with the Russian
Revolution. Yet in spite of this heresy, Heine remained Marx’s
friend16; for in those happy days, excommunication for heresy was
still rather uncommon among those who fought for the open
society, and tolerance was still tolerated.
My criticism of Marx’s ‘historical materialism’ must certainly
not be interpreted as expressing any preference for Hegelian
‘idealism’ over Marx’s ‘materialism’; I hope I have made it clear
that in this conflict between idealism and materialism my
sympathies are with Marx. What I wish to show is that Marx’s
‘materialist interpretation of history’, valuable as it may be, must
not be taken too seriously; that we must regard it as nothing more
than a most valuable suggestion to us to consider things in their
relation to their economic background.

Chapter 16: The Classes
An important place among the various formulations of Marx’s
‘historical materialism’ is occupied by his (and Engels’) statement:

‘The history of all hitherto existing society is a history of class
struggle.’1 The tendency of this statement is clear. It implies that
history is propelled and the fate of man determined by the war of
classes and not by the war of nations (as opposed to the views of
Hegel and of the majority of historians). In the causal explanation
of historical developments, including national wars, class interest
must take the place of that allegedly national interest which, in
reality, is only the interest of a nation’s ruling class. But over and
above this, class struggle and class interest are capable of
explaining phenomena which traditional history may in general not
even attempt to explain. An example of such a phenomenon which
is of great significance for Marxist theory is the historical trend
towards increasing productivity. Even though it may perhaps
record such a trend, traditional history, with its fundamental
category of military power, is quite unable to explain this
phenomenon. Class interest and class war, however, can explain it
fully, according to Marx; indeed, a considerable part of Capital is
devoted to the analysis of the mechanism by which, within the
period called by Marx ‘capitalism’, an increase in productivity is
brought about by these forces.
How is the doctrine of class war related to the institutionalist
doctrine of the autonomy of sociology discussed above2? At first
sight it may seem that these two doctrines are in open conflict, for
in the doctrine of class war, a fundamental part is played by class
interest, which apparently is a kind of motive. But I do not think
that there is any serious inconsistency in this part of Marx’s theory.
And I should even say that nobody has understood Marx, and
particularly that major achievement of his, anti-psychologism, who
does not see how it can be reconciled with the theory of class
struggle. We need not assume, as Vulgar Marxists do, that class
interest must be interpreted psychologically. There may be a few
passages in Marx’s own writings that savour a little of this Vulgar
Marxism, but wherever he makes serious use of anything like class
interest, he always means a thing within the realm of autonomous
sociology, and not a psychological category. He means a thing, a
situation, and not a state of mind, a thought, or a feeling of being
interested in a thing. It is simply that thing or that social institution
or situation which is advantageous to a class. The interest of a class
is simply everything that furthers its power or its prosperity.
According to Marx, class interest in this institutional, or, if we
may say so, ‘objective’, sense exerts a decisive influence on human

minds. Using Hegelian jargon, we might say that the objective
interest of a class becomes conscious in the subjective minds of its
members; it makes them class-interested and class-conscious, and
it makes them act accordingly. Class interest as an institutional or
objective social situation, and its influence upon human minds, is
described by Marx in the epigram which I have quoted (at the
beginning of chapter 14): ‘It is not the consciousness of man that
determines his existence—rather, it is his social existence that
determines his consciousness.’ To this epigram we need add only
the remark that it is, more precisely, the place where man stands in
society, his class situation, by which, according to Marxism, his
consciousness is determined.
Marx gives some indication of how this process of
determination works. As we learned from him in the last chapter,
we can be free only in so far as we emancipate ourselves from the
productive process. But now we shall learn that, in any hitherto
existing society, we were not free even to that extent. For how
could we, he asks, emancipate ourselves from the productive
process? Only by making others do the dirty work for us. We are
thus forced to use them as means for our ends; we must degrade
them. We can buy a greater degree of freedom only at the cost of
enslaving other men, by splitting mankind into classes; the ruling
class gains freedom at the cost of the ruled class, the slaves. But
this fact has the consequence that the members of the ruling class
must pay for their freedom by a new kind of bondage. They are
bound to oppress and to fight the ruled, if they wish to preserve
their own freedom and their own status; they are compelled to do
this, since he who does not do so ceases to belong to the ruling
class. Thus the rulers are determined by their class situation; they
cannot escape from their social relation to the ruled; they are
bound to them, since they are bound to the social metabolism.
Thus all, rulers as well as ruled, are caught in the net, and forced to
fight one another. According to Marx, it is this bondage, this
determination, which brings their struggle within the reach of
scientific method, and of scientific historical prophecy; which
makes it possible to treat the history of society scientifically, as the
history of class struggle. This social net in which the classes are
caught and forced to struggle against one another, is what Marxism
calls the economic structure of society, or the social system.
According to this theory, social systems or class systems
change with the conditions of production, since on these conditions

depends the way in which the rulers can exploit and fight the ruled.
To every particular period of economic development corresponds a
particular social system, and a historical period is best
characterized by its social system of classes; this is why we speak
of ‘feudalism’, ‘capitalism’, etc. ‘The hand-mill’, Marx writes3,
‘gives you a society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill gives you
a society with the industrial capitalist.’ The class relations that
characterize the social system are independent of the individual
man’s will. The social system thus resembles a vast machine in
which the individuals are caught and crushed. ‘In the social
production of their means of existence’, Marx writes4, ‘men enter
into definite and unavoidable relations which are independent of
their will. These productive relationships correspond to the
particular stage in the development of their material productive
forces. The system of all these productive relationships constitutes
the economic structure of society’, i.e. the social system.
Although it has a kind of logic of its own, this social system
works blindly, not reasonably. Those who are caught in its
machinery are, in general, blind too—or nearly so. They cannot
even foresee some of the most important repercussions of their
actions. One man may make it impossible for many to procure an
article which is available in large quantities; he may buy just a
trifle and thereby prevent a slight decrease of price at a critical
moment. Another may in the goodness of his heart distribute his
riches, but by thus contributing to a lessening of the class struggle,
he may cause a delay in the liberation of the oppressed. Since it is
quite impossible to foresee the more remote social repercussions of
our actions, since we are one and all caught in the network, we
cannot seriously attempt to cope with it. We obviously cannot
influence it from outside; but blind as we are, we cannot even
make any plan for its improvement from within. Social engineering
is impossible, and a social technology therefore useless. We cannot
impose our interests upon the social system; instead, the system
forces upon us what we are led to believe to be our interests. It
does so by forcing us to act in accordance with our class interest. It
is vain to lay on the individual, even on the individual ‘capitalist’
or ‘bourgeois’, the blame for the injustice, for the immorality of
social conditions, since it is this very system of conditions that
forces the capitalist to act as he does. And it is also vain to hope
that circumstances may be improved by improving men; rather,
men will be better if the system in which they live is better. ‘Only

in so far’, Marx writes in Capital5, ‘as the capitalist is personified
capital does he play a historical role .. But exactly to that extent,
his motive is not to obtain and to enjoy useful commodities, but to
increase the production of commodities for exchange’ (his real
historical task). ‘Fanatically bent upon the expansion of value, he
ruthlessly drives human beings to produce for production’s sake ..
With the miser, he shares the passion for wealth. But what is a kind
of mania in the miser is in the capitalist the effect of the social
mechanism in which he is only a driving-wheel .. Capitalism
subjects any individual capitalist to the immanent laws of capitalist
production, laws which are external and coercive. Without respite,
competition forces him to extend his capital for the sake of
maintaining it.’
This is the way in which, according to Marx, the social system
determines the actions of the individual; the ruler as well as the
ruled; capitalist or bourgeois as well as proletarian. It is an
illustration of what has been called above the ‘logic of a social
situation’. To a considerable degree, all the actions of a capitalist
are ‘a mere function of the capital which, through his
instrumentality, is endowed with will and consciousness’, as Marx
puts it6, in his Hegelian style. But this means that the social system
determines their thoughts too; for thoughts, or ideas, are partly
instruments of actions, and partly—that is, if they are publicly
expressed—an important kind of social action; for in this case, they
are immediately aimed at influencing the actions of other members
of the society. By thus determining human thoughts, the social
system, and especially the ‘objective interest’ of a class, becomes
conscious in the subjective minds of its members (as we said
before in Hegelian jargon7). Class struggle, as well as competition
between the members of the same class, are the means by which
this is achieved.
We have seen why, according to Marx, social engineering, and
consequently, a social technology, are impossible it is because the
causal chain of dependence binds us to the social system, and not
vice versa. But although we cannot alter the social system at will8,
capitalists as well as workers are bound to contribute to its
transformation, and to our ultimate liberation from its fetters. By
driving ‘human beings to produce for production’s sake’9, the
capitalist coerces them ‘to develop the forces of social
productivity, and to create those material conditions of production
which alone can form the material bases of a higher type of society

whose fundamental principle is the full and free development of
every human individual.’ In this way, even the members of the
capitalist class must play their role on the stage of history and
further the ultimate coming of socialism.
In view of subsequent arguments, a linguistic remark may be
added here on the Marxist terms usually translated by the words
‘class-conscious’ and ‘class consciousness’. These terms indicate,
first of all, the result of the process analysed above, by which the
objective class situation (class interest as well as class struggle)
gains consciousness in the minds of its members, or, to express the
same thought in a language less dependent on Hegel, by which
members of a class become conscious of their class situation.
Being class-conscious, they know not only their place but their true
class interest as well. But over and above this, the original German
word used by Marx suggests something which is usually lost in the
translation. The term is derived from, and alludes to, a common
German word which became part of Hegel’s jargon. Though its
literal translation would be ‘self-conscious’, this word has even in
common use rather the meaning of being conscious of one’s worth
and powers, i.e. of being proud and fully assured of oneself, and
even self-satisfied. Accordingly, the term translated as ‘classconscious’ means in German not simply this, but rather, ‘assured
or proud of one’s class’, and bound to it by the consciousness of
the need for solidarity. This is why Marx and the Marxists apply it
nearly exclusively to the workers, and hardly ever to the
‘bourgeoisie’. The class-conscious proletarian—this is the worker
who is not only aware of his class situation, but who is also classproud, fully assured of the historical mission of his class, and
believing that its unflinching fight will bring about a better world.
How does he know that this will happen? Because being classconscious, he must be a Marxist. The Marxist theory itself and its
scientific prophecy of the advent of socialism are part and parcel of
the historical process by which the class situation ‘emerges into
consciousness’, establishing itself in the minds of the workers.
II
My criticism of Marx’s theory of the classes, as far as its
historicist emphasis goes, follows the lines taken up in the last
chapter. The formula ‘all history is a history of class struggle’ is
very valuable as a suggestion that we should look into the
important part played by class struggle in power politics as well as

in other developments; this suggestion is the more valuable since
Plato’s brilliant analysis of the part played by class struggle in the
history of Greek city states was only rarely taken up in later times.
But again, we must not, of course, take Marx’s word ‘all’ too
seriously. Not even the history of class issues is always a history of
class struggle in the Marxian sense, considering the important part
played by dissension within the classes themselves. Indeed, the
divergence of interests within both the ruling and the ruled classes
goes so far that Marx’s theory of classes must be considered as a
dangerous over-simplification, even if we admit that the issue
between the rich and the poor is always of fundamental
importance. One of the great themes of medieval history, the fight
between popes and emperors, is an example of dissension within
the ruling class. It would be palpably false to interpret this quarrel
as one between exploiter and exploited. (Of course, one can widen
Marx’s concept ‘class’ so as to cover this and similar cases, and
narrow the concept ‘history’, until ultimately Marx’s doctrine
becomes trivially true—a mere tautology; but this would rob it of
any significance.)
One of the dangers of Marx’s formula is that if taken too
seriously, it misleads Marxists into interpreting all political
conflicts as struggles between exploiters and exploited (or else as
attempts to cover up the ‘real issue’, the underlying class conflict).
As a consequence there were Marxists, especially in Germany,
who interpreted a war such as the First World War as one between
the revolutionary or ‘have-not’ Central Powers and an alliance of
conservative or ‘have’ countries—a kind of interpretation which
might be used to excuse any aggression. This is only one example
of the danger inherent in Marx’s sweeping historicist
generalization. On the other hand, his attempt to use what may be
called the ‘logic of the class situation’ to explain the working of
the institutions of the industrial system seems to me admirable in
spite of certain exaggerations and the neglect of some important
aspects of the situation; admirable, at least, as a sociological
analysis of that stage of the industrial system which Marx has
mainly in mind: the system of ‘unrestrained capitalism’ (as I shall
call it10) of one hundred years ago.

Chapter 17: The Legal And The Social System
We are now ready to approach what is probably the most
crucial point in our analysis as well as in our criticism of Marxism;

it is Marx’s theory of the state and—paradoxical as it may sound to
some—of the impotence of all politics.
I
Marx’s theory of the state can be presented by combining the
results of the last two chapters. The legal or juridico-political
system—the system of legal institutions enforced by the state—has
to be understood, according to Marx, as one of the superstructures
erected upon, and giving expression to, the actual productive
forces of the economic system; Marx speaks1 in this connection of
‘juridical and political superstructures’. It is not, of course, the
only way in which the economic or material reality and the
relations between the classes which correspond to it make their
appearance in the world of ideologies and ideas. Another example
of such a superstructure would be, according to Marxist views, the
prevailing moral system. This, as opposed to the legal system, is
not enforced by state power, but sanctioned by an ideology created
and controlled by the ruling class. The difference is, roughly, one
between persuasion and force (as Plato2 would have said); and it is
the state, the legal or political system, which uses force. It is, as
Engels3 puts it, ‘a special repressive force’ for the coercion of the
ruled by the rulers. ‘Political power, properly so called,’ says the
Manifesto4, ‘is merely the organized power of one class for
oppressing the other.’ A similar description is given by Lenin5:
‘According to Marx, the state is an organ of class domination, an
organ for the oppression of one class by another; its aim is the
creation of an ‘order’ which legalizes and perpetuates this
oppression ..’ The state, in brief, is just part of the machinery by
which the ruling class carries on its struggle.
Before proceeding to develop the consequences of this view of
the state, it may be pointed out that it is partly an institutional and
partly an essentialist theory. It is institutional in so far as Marx
tries to ascertain what practical functions legal institutions have in
social life. But it is essentialist in so far as Marx neither inquires
into the variety of ends which these institutions may possibly serve
(or be made to serve), nor suggests what institutional reforms are
necessary in order to make the state serve those ends which he
himself might deem desirable. Instead of making his demands or
proposals concerning the functions which he wants the state, the
legal institutions or the government to perform, he asks, ‘What is
the state?’; that is to say, he tries to discover the essential function

of legal institutions. It has been shown before6 that such a typically
essentialist question cannot be answered in a satisfactory way; yet
this question, undoubtedly, is in keeping with Marx’s essentialist
and metaphysical approach which interprets the field of ideas and
norms as the appearance of an economic reality.
What are the consequences of this theory of the state? The
most important consequence is that all politics, all legal and
political institutions as well as all political struggles, can never be
of primary importance. Politics are impotent. They can never alter
decisively the economic reality. The main if not the only task of
any enlightened political activity is to see that the alterations in the
juridico-political cloak keep pace with the changes in the social
reality, that is to say, in the means of production and in the
relations between the classes; in this way, such difficulties as must
arise if politics lag behind these developments can be avoided. Or
in other words, political developments are either superficial,
unconditioned by the deeper reality of the social system, in which
case they arc doomed to be unimportant, and can never be of real
help to the suppressed and exploited; or else they give expression
to a change in the economic background and the class situation, in
which case they are of the character of volcanic eruptions, of
complete revolutions which can perhaps be foreseen, as they arise
from the social system, and whose ferocity might then be mitigated
by non-resistance to the eruptive forces, but which can be neither
caused nor suppressed by political action.
These consequences show again the unity of Marx’s historicist
system of thought. Yet considering that few movements have done
as much as Marxism to stimulate interest in political action, the
theory of the fundamental impotence of politics appears somewhat
paradoxical. (Marxists might, of course, meet this remark with
either of two arguments. The one is that in the theory expounded,
political action has its function; for even though the workers’ party
cannot, by its actions, improve the lot of the exploited masses, its
fight awakens class consciousness and thereby prepares for the
revolution. This would be the argument of the radical wing. The
other argument, used by the moderate wing, asserts that there may
exist historical periods in which political action can be directly
helpful; the periods, namely, in which the forces of the two
opposing classes are approximately in equilibrium. In such periods,
political effort and energy may be decisive in achieving very
significant improvements for the workers.—It is clear that this

second argument sacrifices some of the fundamental positions of
the theory, but without realizing this, and consequently without
going to the root of the matter.)
It is worth noting that according to Marxist theory, the
workers’ party can hardly make political mistakes of any
importance, as long as the party continues to play its assigned role,
and to press the claims of the workers energetically. For political
mistakes cannot materially affect the actual class situation, and
even less the economic reality on which everything else ultimately
depends.
Another important consequence of the theory is that, in
principle, all government, even democratic government, is a
dictatorship of the ruling class over the ruled. ‘The executive of the
modern state’, says the Manifesto7, ‘is merely a committee for
managing the economic affairs of the whole bourgeoisie ..’ What
we call a democracy is, according to this theory, nothing but that
form of class dictatorship which happens to be most convenient in
a certain historical situation. (This doctrine does not agree very
well with the class equilibrium theory of the moderate wing
mentioned above.) And just as the state, under capitalism, is a
dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, so, after the social revolution, it
will at first be a dictatorship of the proletariat. But this proletarian
state must lose its function as soon as the resistance of the old
bourgeoisie has broken down. For the proletarian revolution leads
to a one-class society, and therefore to a classless society in which
there can be no class-dictatorship. Thus the state, deprived of any
function, must disappear. ‘It withers away’, as Engels said8.
II
I am very far from defending Marx’s theory of the state. His
theory of the impotence of all politics, more particularly, and his
view of democracy, appear to me to be not only mistakes, but fatal
mistakes. But it must be admitted that behind these grim as well as
ingenious theories, there stood a grim and depressing experience.
And although Marx, in my opinion, failed to understand the future
which he so keenly wished to foresee, it seems to me that even his
mistaken theories are proof of his keen sociological insight into the
conditions of his own time, and of his invincible humanitarianism
and sense of justice.
Marx’s theory of the state, in spite of its abstract and
philosophical character, undoubtedly furnishes an enlightening

interpretation of his own historical period. It is at least a tenable
view that the so-called ‘industrial revolution’ developed at first
mainly as a revolution of the ‘material means of production’, i.e. of
machinery; that this led, next, to a transformation of the class
structure of society, and thus to a new social system; and that
political revolutions and other transformations of the legal system
came only as a third step. Even though this Marxist interpretation
of the ‘rise of capitalism’ has been challenged by historians who
were able to lay bare some of its deep-lying ideological
foundations (which were perhaps not quite unsuspected by Marx9,
although destructive to his theory), there can be little doubt about
the value of the Marxist interpretation as a first approximation, and
about the service rendered to his successors in this field. And even
though some of the developments studied by Marx were
deliberately fostered by legislative measures, and indeed made
possible only by legislation (as Marx himself says10), it was he
who first discussed the influence of economic developments and
economic interests upon legislation, and the function of legislative
measures as weapons in the class struggle, and especially as means
for the creation of a ‘surplus population’, and with it, of the
industrial proletariat.
It is clear from many of Marx’s passages that these
observations confirmed him in his belief that the juridico-political
system is a mere ‘superstructure’11 on the social, i.e. the economic,
system; a theory which, although undoubtedly refuted by
subsequent experience12, not only remains interesting, but also, I
suggest, contains a grain of truth.
But it was not only Marx’s general views of the relations
between the economic and the political system that were in this
way influenced by his historical experience; his views on
liberalism and democracy, more particularly, which he considered
to be nothing but veils for the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie,
furnished an interpretation of the social situation of his time which
appeared to fit only too well, corroborated as it was by sad
experience. For Marx lived, especially in his younger years, in a
period of the most shameless and cruel exploitation. And this
shameless exploitation was cynically defended by hypocritical
apologists who appealed to the principle of human freedom, to the
right of man to determinate his own fate, and to enter freely into
any contract he considers favourable to his interests.

Using the slogan ‘equal and free competition for all’, the
unrestrained capitalism of this period resisted successfully all
labour legislation until the year 1833, and its practical execution
for many years more13. The consequence was a life of desolation
and misery which can hardly be imagined in our day. Especially
the exploitation of women and children led to incredible suffering.
Here are two examples, quoted from Marx’s Capital: ‘William
Wood, 9 years old, was 7 years and 10 months when he began to
work .. He came to work every day in the week at 6 a.m., and left
off about 9 p.m ...’ ‘Fifteen hours of labour for a child 7 years old!’
exclaims an official report14 of the Children’s Employment
Commission of 1863. Other children were forced to start work at 4
a.m., or to work throughout the night until 6 a.m., and it was not
unusual for children of only six years to be forced to a daily toil of
15 hours.—’ Mary Anne Walkley had worked without pause 26½
hours, together with sixty other girls, thirty of them in one room ..
A doctor, Mr. Keys, called in too late, testified before the coroner’s
jury that “Mary Anne Walkley had died from long hours of work
in an overcrowded workroom ..”. Wishing to give this gentleman a
lecture in good manners, the coroner’s jury brought in a verdict to
the effect that “the deceased had died of apoplexy, but there is
reason to fear that her death had been accelerated by overwork in
an overcrowded workroom”.’15 Such were the conditions of the
working class even in 1863, when Marx was writing Capital; his
burning protest against these crimes, which were then tolerated,
and sometimes even defended, not only by professional economists
but also by churchmen, will secure him forever a place among the
liberators of mankind.
In view of such experiences, we need not wonder that Marx did
not think very highly of liberalism, and that he saw in
parliamentary democracy nothing but a veiled dictatorship of the
bourgeoisie. And it was easy for him to interpret these facts as
supporting his analysis of the relationship between the legal and
the social system. According to the legal system, equality and
freedom were established, at least approximately. But what did this
mean in reality! Indeed, we must not blame Marx for insisting that
the economic facts alone are ‘real’ and that the legal system may
be a mere superstructure, a cloak for this reality, and an instrument
of class domination.
The opposition between the legal and the social system is most
clearly developed in Capital. In one of its theoretical parts (treated

more fully in chapter 20), Marx approaches the analysis of the
capitalist economic system by using the simplifying and idealizing
assumption that the legal system is perfect in every respect.
Freedom, equality before the law, justice, are all assumed to be
guaranteed to everybody. There are no privileged classes before
the law. Over and above that, he assumes that not even in the
economic realm is there any kind of ‘robbery’; he assumes that a
‘just price’ is paid for all commodities, including the labour power
which the worker sells to the capitalist on the labour market. The
price for all these commodities is ‘just’, in the sense that all
commodities are bought and sold in proportion to the average
amount of labour needed for their reproduction (or using Marx’s
terminology, they are bought and sold according to their true
‘value’16). Of course, Marx knows that all this is an oversimplification, for it is his opinion that the workers are hardly ever
treated as fairly as that; in other words, that they are usually
cheated. But arguing from these idealized premises, he attempts to
show that even under so excellent a legal system, the economic
system would function in such a way that the workers would not be
able to enjoy their freedom. In spite of all this ‘justice’, they would
not be very much better off than slaves17. For if they are poor, they
can only sell themselves, their wives and their children on the
labour market, for as much as is necessary for the reproduction of
their labour power. That is to say, for the whole of their labour
power, they will not get more than the barest means of existence.
This shows that exploitation is not merely robbery. It cannot be
eliminated by merely legal means. (And Proudhon’s criticism that
‘property is theft’ is much too superficial18.)
In consequence of this, Marx was led to hold that the workers
cannot hope much from the improvement of a legal system which
as everybody knows grants to rich and poor alike the freedom of
sleeping on park benches, and which threatens them alike with
punishment for the attempt to live ‘without visible means of
support’. In this way Marx arrived at what may be termed (in
Hegelian language) the distinction between formal and material
freedom. Formal19 or legal freedom, although Marx does not rate it
low, turns out to be quite insufficient for securing to us that
freedom which he considered to be the aim of the historical
development of mankind. What matters is real, i.e. economic or
material, freedom. This can be achieved only by an equal

emancipation from drudgery. For this emancipation, ‘the
shortening of the labour day is the fundamental prerequisite’.
III
What have we to say to Marx’s analysis? Are we to believe that
politics, or the framework of legal institutions, are intrinsically
impotent to remedy such a situation, and that only a complete
social revolution, a complete change of the ‘social system’, can
help? Or are we to believe the defenders of an unrestrained
‘capitalist’ system who emphasize (rightly, I think) the tremendous
benefit to be derived from the mechanism of free markets, and who
conclude from this that a truly free labour market would be of the
greatest benefit to all concerned?
I believe that the injustice and inhumanity of the unrestrained
‘capitalist system’ described by Marx cannot be questioned; but it
can be interpreted in terms of what we called, in a previous
chapter20, the paradox of freedom. Freedom, we have seen, defeats
itself, if it is unlimited. Unlimited freedom means that a strong
man is free to bully one who is weak and to rob him of his
freedom. This is why we demand that the state should limit
freedom to a certain extent, so that everyone’s freedom is protected
by law. Nobody should be at the mercy of others, but all should
have a right to be protected by the state.
Now I believe that these considerations, originally meant to
apply to the realm of brute-force, of physical intimidation, must be
applied to the economic realm also. Even if the state protects its
citizens from being bullied by physical violence (as it does, in
principle, under the system of unrestrained capitalism), it may
defeat our ends by its failure to protect them from the misuse of
economic power. In such a state, the economically strong is still
free to bully one who is economically weak, and to rob him of his
freedom. Under these circumstances, unlimited economic freedom
can be just as self-defeating as unlimited physical freedom, and
economic power may be nearly as dangerous as physical violence;
for those who possess a surplus of food can force those who are
starving into a ‘freely’ accepted servitude without using violence.
And assuming that the state limits its activities to the suppression
of violence (and to the protection of property), a minority which is
economically strong may in this way exploit the majority of those
who are economically weak.

If this analysis is correct21, then the nature of the remedy is
clear. It must be a political remedy—a remedy similar to the one
which we use against physical violence. We must construct social
institutions, enforced by the power of the state, for the protection
of the economically weak from the economically strong. The state
must see to it that nobody need enter into an inequitable
arrangement out of fear of starvation, or economic ruin.
This, of course, means that the principle of non-intervention, of
an unrestrained economic system, has to be given up; if we wish
freedom to be safeguarded, then we must demand that the policy of
unlimited economic freedom be replaced by the planned economic
intervention of the state. We must demand that unrestrained
capitalism give way to an economic interventionism22. And this is
precisely what has happened. The economic system described and
criticized by Marx has everywhere ceased to exist. It has been
replaced, not by a system in which the state begins to lose its
functions and consequently ‘shows signs of withering away’, but
by various interventionist systems, in which the functions of the
state in the economic realm are extended far beyond the protection
of property and of free contracts’. (This development will be
discussed in the next chapters.)
IV
I should like to characterize the point here reached as the most
central point in our analysis. It is only here that we can begin to
realize the significance of the clash between historicism and social
engineering, and its effect upon the policy of the friends of the
open society.
Marxism claims to be more than a science. It does more than
make a historical prophecy. It claims to be the basis for practical
political action. It criticizes existing society, and it asserts that it
can lead the way to a better world. But according to Marx’s own
theory, we cannot at will alter the economic reality by, for
example, legal reforms. Politics can do no more than ‘shorten and
lessen the birth-pangs’.23 This, I think, is an extremely poor
political programme, and its poverty is a consequence of the thirdrate place which it attributes to political power in the hierarchy of
powers. For according to Marx, the real power lies in the evolution
of machinery; next in importance is the system of economic classrelationships; and the least important influence is that of politics.

A directly opposite view is implied in the position we have
reached in our analysis. It considers political power as
fundamental. Political power, from this point of view, can control
economic power. This means an immense extension of the field of
political activities. We can ask what we wish to achieve and how
to achieve it. We can, for instance, develop a rational political
programme for the protection of the economically weak. We can
make laws to limit exploitation. We can limit the working day; but
we can do much more. By law, we can insure the workers (or
better still, all citizens) against disability, unemployment, and old
age. In this way we can make impossible such forms of
exploitation as are based upon the helpless economic position of a
worker who must yield to anything in order not to starve. And
when we are able by law to guarantee a livelihood to everybody
willing to work, and there is no reason why we should not achieve
that, then the protection of the freedom of the citizen from
economic fear and economic intimidation will approach
completeness. From this point of view, political power is the key to
economic protection. Political power and its control is everything.
Economic power must not be permitted to dominate political
power; if necessary, it must be fought and brought under control by
political power.
From the point of view reached, we can say that Marx’s
disparaging attitude towards political power not only means that he
neglects to develop a theory of the most important potential means
of bettering the lot of the economically weak, but also that he
neglected the greatest potential danger to human freedom. His
naive view that, in a classless society, state power would lose its
function and ‘wither away’ shows very clearly that he never
grasped the paradox of freedom, and that he never understood the
function which state power could and should perform, in the
service of freedom and humanity. (Yet this view of Marx stands
witness to the fact that he was, ultimately, an individualist, in spite
of his collectivist appeal to class consciousness.) In this way, the
Marxian view is analogous to the liberal belief that all we need is
‘equality of opportunity’. We certainly need this. But it is not
enough. It does not protect those who are less gifted, or less
ruthless, or less lucky, from becoming objects of exploitation for
those who are more gifted, or ruthless, or lucky.
Moreover, from the point of view we have reached, what
Marxists describe disparagingly as ‘mere formal freedom’

becomes the basis of everything else. This ‘mere formal freedom’,
i.e. democracy, the right of the people to judge and to dismiss their
government, is the only known device by which we can try to
protect ourselves against the misuse of political power24; it is the
control of the rulers by the ruled. And since political power can
control economic power, political democracy is also the only
means for the control of economic power by the ruled. Without
democratic control, there can be no earthly reason why any
government should not use its political and economic power for
purposes very different from the protection of the freedom of its
citizens.
V
It is the fundamental role of ‘formal freedom’ which is
overlooked by Marxists who think that formal democracy is not
enough and wish to supplement it by what they usually call
‘economic democracy’; a vague and utterly superficial phrase
which obscures the fact that ‘merely formal freedom’ is the only
guarantee of a democratic economic policy.
Marx discovered the significance of economic power; and it is
understandable that he exaggerated its status. He and the Marxists
see economic power everywhere. Their argument runs: he who has
the money has the power; for if necessary, he can buy guns and
even gangsters. But this is a roundabout argument. In fact, it
contains an admission that the man who has the gun has the power.
And if he who has the gun becomes aware of this, then it may not
be long until he has both the gun and the money. But under an
unrestrained capitalism, Marx’s argument applies, to some extent;
for a rule which develops institutions for the control of guns and
gangsters but not of the power of money is liable to come under
the influence of this power. In such a state, an uncontrolled
gangsterism of wealth may rule. But Marx himself, I think, would
have been the first to admit that this is not true of all states; that
there have been times in history when, for example, all exploitation
was looting, directly based upon the power of the mailed fist. And
to-day there will be few to support the naive view that the
‘progress of history’ has once and for all put an end to these more
direct ways of exploiting men, and that, once formal freedom has
been achieved, it is impossible for us to fall again under the sway
of such primitive forms of exploitation.

These considerations would be sufficient for refuting the
dogmatic doctrine that economic power is more fundamental than
physical power, or the power of the state. But there are other
considerations as well. As has been rightly emphasized by various
writers (among them Bertrand Russell and Walter Lippmann25), it
is only the active intervention of the state—the protection of
property by laws backed by physical sanctions—which makes of
wealth a potential source of power; for without this intervention, a
man would soon be without his wealth. Economic power is
therefore entirely dependent on political and physical power.
Russell gives historical examples which illustrate this dependence,
and sometimes even helplessness, of wealth: ‘Economic power
within the state,’ he writes26, ‘although ultimately derived from
law and public opinion, easily acquires a certain independence. It
can influence law by corruption and public opinion by propaganda.
It can put politicians under obligations which interfere with their
freedom. It can threaten to cause a financial crisis. But there are
very definite limits to what it can achieve. Caesar was helped to
power by his creditors, who saw no hope of repayment except
through his success; but when he had succeeded he was powerful
enough to defy them. Charles V borrowed from the Fuggers the
money required to buy the position of Emperor, but when he had
become Emperor he snapped his fingers at them and they lost what
they had lent.’
The dogma that economic power is at the root of all evil must
be discarded. Its place must be taken by an understanding of the
dangers of any form of uncontrolled power. Money as such is not
particularly dangerous. It becomes dangerous only if it can buy
power, either directly, or by enslaving the economically weak who
must sell themselves in order to live.
We must think in these matters in even more materialist terms,
as it were, than Marx did. We must realize that the control of
physical power and of physical exploitation remains the central
political problem. In order to establish this control, we must
establish ‘merely formal freedom’. Once we have achieved this,
and have learned how to use it for the control of political power,
everything rests with us. We must not blame anybody else any
longer, nor cry out against the sinister economic demons behind
the scenes. For in a democracy, we hold the keys to the control of
the demons. We can tame them. We must realize this and use the
keys; we must construct institutions for the democratic control of

economic power, and for our protection from economic
exploitation.
Much has been made by Marxists of the possibility of buying
votes, either directly or by buying propaganda. But closer
consideration shows that we have here a good example of the
power-political situation analysed above. Once we have achieved
formal freedom, we can control vote-buying in every form. There
are laws to limit the expenditure on electioneering, and it rests
entirely with us to see that much more stringent laws of this kind
are introduced27. The legal system can be made a powerful
instrument for its own protection. In addition, we can influence
public opinion, and insist upon a much more rigid moral code in
political matters. All this we can do; but we must first realize that
social engineering of this kind is our task, that it is in our power,
and that we must not wait for economic earthquakes miraculously
to produce a new economic world for us, so that all we shall have
to do will be to unveil it, to remove the old political cloak.
VI
Of course, in practice Marxists never fully relied on the
doctrine of the impotence of political power. So far as they had an
opportunity to act, or to plan action, they usually assumed, like
everybody else, that political power can be used for the control of
economic power. But their plans and actions were never based on a
clear refutation of their original theory, nor upon any wellconsidered view of that most fundamental problem of all politics:
the control of the controller, of the dangerous accumulation of
power represented in the state. They never realized the full
significance of democracy as the only known means to achieve this
control.
As a consequence they never realized the danger inherent in a
policy of increasing the power of the state. Although they
abandoned more or less unconsciously the doctrine of the
impotence of politics, they retained the view that state power
presents no important problem, and that it is bad only if it is in the
hands of the bourgeoisie. They did not realize that all power, and
political power at least as much as economic power, is dangerous.
Thus they retained their formula of the dictatorship of the
proletariat. They did not understand the principle (cp. chapter 8)
that all large-scale politics must be institutional, not personal; and
when clamouring for the extension of state powers (in contrast to

Marx’s view of the state) they never considered that the wrong
persons might one day get hold of these extended powers. This is
part of the reason why, as far as they proceeded to consider stateintervention, they planned to give the state practically limitless
powers in the economic realm. They retained Marx’s holistic and
Utopian belief that only a brand-new ‘social system’ can improve
matters.
I have criticized this Utopian and Romantic approach to social
engineering in a previous chapter (chapter 9). But I wish to add
here that economic intervention, even the piecemeal methods
advocated here, will tend to increase the power of the state.
Interventionism is therefore extremely dangerous. This is not a
decisive argument against it; state power must always remain a
dangerous though necessary evil. But it should be a warning that if
we relax our watchfulness, and if we do not strengthen our
democratic institutions while giving more power to the state by
interventionist ‘planning’, then we may lose our freedom. And if
freedom is lost, everything is lost, including ‘planning’. For why
should plans for the welfare of the people be carried out if the
people have no power to enforce them? Only freedom can make
security secure.
We thus see that there is not only a paradox of freedom but
also a paradox of state planning. If we plan too much, if we give
too much power to the state, then freedom will be lost, and that
will be the end of planning.
Such considerations lead us back to our plea for piecemeal, and
against Utopian or holistic, methods of social engineering. And
they lead us back to our demand that measures should be planned
to fight concrete evils rather than to establish some ideal good.
State intervention should be limited to what is really necessary for
the protection of freedom.
But it is not enough to say that our solution should be a
minimum solution; that we should be watchful; and that we should
not give more power to the state than is necessary for the
protection of freedom. These remarks may raise problems, but they
do not show a way to a solution. It is even conceivable that there is
no solution; that the acquisition of new economic powers by a
state—whose powers, as compared to those of its citizens, are
always dangerously great—will make it irresistible. So far, we
have shown neither that freedom can be preserved nor how it can
be preserved.

Under these circumstances it may be useful to remember our
considerations of chapter 7 concerning the question of the control
of political power and the paradox of freedom.
VII
The important distinction which we made there was that
between persons and institutions. We pointed out that, while the
political question of the day may demand a personal solution, all
long-term policy—and especially all democratic long-term
policy—must be conceived in terms of impersonal institutions.
And we pointed out that, more especially, the problem of
controlling the rulers, and of checking their powers, was in the
main an institutional problem—the problem, in short, of designing
institutions for preventing even bad rulers from doing too much
damage.
Analogous considerations will apply to the problem of the
control of the economic power of the state. What we shall have to
guard against is an increase in the power of the rulers. We must
guard against persons and against their arbitrariness. Some types of
institutions may confer arbitrary powers upon a person; but other
types will deny them to that person.
If we look upon our labour legislation from this point of view,
then we shall find both types of institutions. Many of these laws
add very little power to the executive organs of the state. It is
conceivable, to be sure, that the laws against child labour, for
example, may be misused, by a civil servant, to intimidate, and to
dominate over, an innocent citizen. But dangers of this kind are
hardly serious if compared with those which are inherent in a
legislation that confers upon the rulers discretionary powers, such
as the power of directing labour28. Similarly, a law establishing
that a citizen’s misuse of his property should be punished by its
forfeiture will be incomparably less dangerous than one which
gives the rulers, or the servants of the state, discretionary powers
of requisitioning a citizen’s property.
We thus arrive at a distinction between two entirely different
methods29 by which the economic intervention of the state may
proceed. The first is that of designing a ‘legal framework’ of
protective institutions (laws restricting the powers of the owner of
an animal, or of a landowner, are an example). The second is that
of empowering organs of the state to act—within certain limits—as
they consider necessary for achieving the ends laid down by the

rulers for the time being. We may describe the first procedure as
‘institutional’ or ‘indirect’ intervention, and the second as
‘personal’ or ‘direct’ intervention. (Of course, intermediate cases
exist.)
There can be no doubt, from the point of view of democratic
control, which of these methods is preferable. The obvious policy
for all democratic intervention is to make use of the first method
wherever this is possible, and to restrict the use of the second
method to cases for which the first method is inadequate. (Such
cases exist. The classical example is the Budget—this expression
of the Chancellor’s discretion and sense of what is equitable and
just. And it is conceivable although highly undesirable that a
counter-cycle measure may have to be of a similar character.)
From the point of view of piecemeal social engineering, the
difference between the two methods is highly important. Only the
first, the institutional method, makes it possible to make
adjustments in the light of discussion and experience. It alone
makes it possible to apply the method of trial and error to our
political actions. It is long-term; yet the permanent legal
framework can be slowly changed, in order to make allowances for
unforeseen and undesired consequences, for changes in other parts
of the framework, etc. It alone allows us to find out, by experience
and analysis, what we actually were doing when we intervened
with a certain aim in mind. Discretionary decisions of the rulers or
civil servants are outside these rational methods. They are shortterm decisions, transitory, changing from day to day, or at best,
from year to year. As a rule (the Budget is the great exception)
they cannot even be publicly discussed, both because necessary
information is lacking, and because the principles on which the
decision is taken are obscure. If they exist at all, they are usually
not institutionalized, but part of an internal departmental tradition.
But it is not only in this sense that the first method can be
described as rational and the second as irrational. It is also in an
entirely different and highly important sense. The legal framework
can be known and understood by the individual citizen; and it
should be designed to be so understandable. Its functioning is
predictable. It introduces a factor of certainty and security into
social life. When it is altered, allowances can be made, during a
transitional period, for those individuals who have laid their plans
in the expectation of its constancy.

As opposed to this, the method of personal intervention must
introduce an ever-growing element of unpredictability into social
life, and with it will develop the feeling that social life is irrational
and insecure. The use of discretionary powers is liable to grow
quickly, once it has become an accepted method, since adjustments
will be necessary, and adjustments to discretionary short-term
decisions can hardly be carried out by institutional means. This
tendency must greatly increase the irrationality of the system,
creating in many the impression that there are hidden powers
behind the scenes, and making them susceptible to the conspiracy
theory of society with all its consequences—heresy hunts, national,
social, and class hostility.
In spite of all this, the obvious policy of preferring where
possible the institutional method is far from being generally
accepted. The failure to accept it is, I suppose, due to different
reasons. One is that it needs a certain detachment to embark on the
long-term task of re-designing the ‘legal framework’. But
governments live from hand to mouth, and discretionary powers
belong to this style of living—quite apart from the fact that rulers
are inclined to love those powers for their own sake. But the most
important reason is, undoubtedly, that the significance of the
distinction between the two methods is not understood. The way to
its understanding is blocked to the followers of Plato, Hegel, and
Marx. They will never see that the old question ‘Who shall be the
rulers?’ must be superseded by the more real one ‘How can we
tame them?’
VIII
If we now look back at Marx’s theory of the impotence of
politics and of the power of historical forces, then we must admit
that it is an imposing edifice. It is the direct result of his
sociological method; of his economic historicism, of the doctrine
that the development of the economic system, or of man’s
metabolism, determines his social and political development. The
experience of his time, his humanitarian indignation, and the need
of bringing to the oppressed the consolation of a prophecy, the
hope, or even the certainty, of their victory, all this is united in one
grandiose philosophic system, comparable or even superior to the
holistic systems of Plato and Hegel. It is only due to the accident
that he was not a reactionary that the history of philosophy takes so
little notice of him and assumes that he was mainly a propagandist.

The reviewer of Capital who wrote: ‘At the first glance .. we come
to the conclusion that the author is one of the greatest among the
idealist philosophers, in the German, that is to say, the bad sense of
the word “idealist”. But in actual fact, he is enormously more
realistic than any of his predecessors ..’30, this reviewer hit the nail
on the head. Marx was the last of the great holistic system builders.
We should take care to leave it at that, and not to replace his by
another Great System. What we need is not holism. It is piecemeal
social engineering.
With this, I conclude my critical analysis of Marx’s philosophy
of the method of social science, of his economic determinism as
well as of his prophetic historicism. The final test of a method,
however, must be its practical results. I therefore proceed now to a
more detailed examination of the main result of his method, the
prophecy of the impending advent of a classless society.

Chapter 18: The Coming Of Socialism
I
Economic historicism is the method applied by Marx to an
analysis of the impending changes in our society. According to
Marx, every particular social system must destroy itself, simply
because it must create the forces which produce the next historical
period. A sufficiently penetrating analysis of the feudal system,
undertaken shortly before the industrial revolution, might have led
to the detection of the forces which were about to destroy
feudalism, and to the prediction of the most important
characteristics of the coming period, capitalism. Similarly, an
analysis of the development of capitalism might enable us to detect
the forces which work for its destruction, and to predict the most
important characteristics of the new historical period which lies
ahead of us. For there is surely no reason to believe that capitalism,
of all social systems, will last for ever. On the contrary, the
material conditions of production, and with them, the ways of
human life, have never changed so quickly as they have done
under capitalism. By changing its own foundations in this way,
capitalism is bound to transform itself, and to produce a new
period in the history of mankind.
According to Marx’s method, the principles of which have
been discussed above, the fundamental or essential1 forces which
will destroy or transform capitalism must be searched for in the

evolution of the material means of production. Once these
fundamental forces have been discovered, it is possible to trace
their influence upon the social relationships between classes as
well as upon the juridical and political systems.
The analysis of the fundamental economic forces and the
suicidal historical tendencies of the period which he called
‘capitalism’ was undertaken by Marx in Capital, the great work of
his life. The historical period and the economic system he dealt
with was that of western Europe and especially England, from
about the middle of the eighteenth century to 1867 (the year of the
first publication of Capital). The ‘ultimate aim of this work’, as
Marx explained in his preface2, was ‘to lay bare the economic law
of motion of modern society’, in order to prophesy its fate. A
secondary aim3 was the refutation of the apologists of capitalism,
of the economists who presented the laws of the capitalist mode of
production as if they were inexorable laws of nature, declaring
with Burke: ‘The laws of commerce are the laws of nature, and
therefore the laws of God.’ Marx contrasted these allegedly
inexorable laws with those which he maintained to be the only
inexorable laws of society, namely, its laws of development; and
he tried to show that what the economists declared to be eternal
and immutable laws were in fact merely temporary regularities,
doomed to be destroyed together with capitalism itself.
Marx’s historical prophecy can be described as a closely knit
argument. But Capital elaborates only what I shall call the ‘first
step’ of this argument, the analysis of the fundamental economic
forces of capitalism and their influence upon the relations between
the classes. The ‘second step’, which leads to the conclusion that a
social revolution is inevitable, and the ‘third step’, which leads to
the prediction of the emergence of a classless, i.e. socialist, society,
are only sketched. In this chapter, I shall first explain more clearly
what I call the three steps of the Marxist argument, and then
discuss the third of these steps in detail. In the two following
chapters, I shall discuss the second and the first steps. To reverse
the order of the steps in this way turns out to be best for a detailed
critical discussion; the advantage lies in the fact that it is then
easier to assume without prejudice the truth of the premises of each
step in the argument, and to concentrate entirely upon the question
whether the conclusion reached in this particular step follows from
its premises. Here are the three steps.

In the first step of his argument, Marx analyses the method of
capitalist production. He finds that there is a tendency towards an
increase in the productivity of work, connected with technical
improvements as well as with what he calls the increasing
accumulation of the means of production. Starting from here, the
argument leads him to the conclusion that in the realm of the social
relations between the classes this tendency must lead to the
accumulation of more and more wealth in fewer and fewer hands;
that is to say, the conclusion is reached that there will be a
tendency towards an increase of wealth and misery; of wealth in
the ruling class, the bourgeoisie, and of misery in the ruled class,
the workers. This first step will be treated in chapter 20 (‘
Capitalism and its Fate’).
In the second step of the argument, the result of the first step is
taken for granted. From it, two conclusions are drawn: first, that all
classes except a small ruling bourgeoisie and a large exploited
working class are bound to disappear, or to become insignificant;
secondly, that the increasing tension between these two classes
must lead to a social revolution. This step will be analysed in
chapter 19 (‘ The Social Revolution’).
In the third step of the argument, the conclusions of the second
step are taken for granted in their turn; and the final conclusion
reached is that, after the victory of the workers over the
bourgeoisie, there will be a society consisting of one class only,
and, therefore, a classless society, a society without exploitation;
that is to say, socialism.
II
I now proceed to the discussion of the third step, of the final
prophecy of the coming of socialism.
The main premises of this step, to be criticized in the next
chapter but here to be taken for granted, are these: the development
of capitalism has led to the elimination of all classes but two, a
small bourgeoisie and a huge proletariat; and the increase of
misery has forced the latter to revolt against its exploiters. The
conclusions are, first, that the workers must win the struggle,
secondly that, by eliminating the bourgeoisie, they must establish a
classless society, since only one class remains.
Now I am prepared to grant that the first conclusion follows
from the premises (in conjunction with a few premises of minor
importance which we need not question). Not only is the number

of the bourgeoisie small, but their physical existence, their
‘metabolism’, depends upon the proletariat. The exploiter, the
drone, starves without the exploited; in any case, if he destroys the
exploited then he ends his own career as a drone. Thus he cannot
win; he can, at the best, put up a prolonged struggle. The worker,
on the other hand, does not depend for his material subsistence on
his exploiter; once the worker revolts, once he has decided to
challenge the existing order, the exploiter has no essential social
function any longer. The worker can destroy his class enemy
without endangering his own existence. Accordingly, there is only
one outcome possible. The bourgeoisie will disappear.
But does the second conclusion follow? Is it true that the
workers’ victory must lead to a classless society? I do not think so.
From the fact that of two classes only one remains, it does not
follow that there will be a classless society. Classes are not like
individuals, even if we admit that they behave nearly like
individuals so long as there are two classes who are joined in
battle. The unity or solidarity of a class, according to Marx’s own
analysis, is part of their class consciousness4, which in turn is very
largely a product of the class struggle. There is no earthly reason
why the individuals who form the proletariat should retain their
class unity once the pressure of the struggle against the common
class enemy has ceased. Any latent conflict of interests is now
likely to divide the formerly united proletariat into new classes,
and to develop into a new class struggle. (The principles of
dialectics would suggest that a new antithesis, a new class
antagonism, must soon develop. Yet, of course, dialectics is
sufficiently vague and adaptable to explain anything at all, and
therefore a classless society also, as a dialectically necessary
synthesis of an antithetical development5.)
The most likely development is, of course, that those actually
in power at the moment of victory—those of the revolutionary
leaders who have survived the struggle for power and the various
purges, together with their staff—will form a New Class: the new
ruling class of the new society, a kind of new aristocracy or
bureaucracy6; and it is most likely that they will attempt to hide
this fact. This they can do, most conveniently, by retaining as
much as possible of the revolutionary ideology, taking advantage
of these sentiments instead of wasting their time in efforts to
destroy them (in accordance with Pareto’s advice to all rulers).
And it seems likely enough that they will be able to make fullest

use of the revolutionary ideology if at the same time they exploit
the fear of counter-revolutionary developments. In this way, the
revolutionary ideology will serve them for apologetic purposes: it
will serve them both as a vindication of the use they make of their
power, and as a means of stabilizing it; in short, as a new ‘opium
for the people’.
Something of this kind are the events which, on Marx’s own
premises, are likely to happen. Yet it is not my task here to make
historical prophecies (or to interpret the past history of many
revolutions’). I merely wish to show that Marx’s conclusion, the
prophecy of the coming of a classless society, does not follow from
the premises. The third step of Marx’s argument must be
pronounced to be inconclusive.
More than this I do not maintain. I do not think, more
particularly, that it is possible to prophesy that socialism will not
come, or to say that the premises of the argument make the
introduction of socialism very unlikely. It is, for instance, possible
that the prolonged struggle and the enthusiasm of victory may
contribute to a feeling of solidarity strong enough to continue until
laws preventing exploitation and the misuse of power are
established. (The establishment of institutions for the democratic
control of the rulers is the only guarantee for the elimination of
exploitation.) The chances of founding such a society will depend,
in my opinion, very largely upon the devotion of the workers to the
ideas of socialism and freedom, as opposed to the immediate
interests of their class. These are matters which cannot be easily
foreseen; all that can certainly be said is that class struggle as such
does not always produce lasting solidarity among the oppressed.
There are examples of such solidarity and great devotion to the
common cause; but there are also examples of groups of workers
who pursue their particular group interest even where it is in open
conflict with the interest of the other workers, and with the idea of
the solidarity of the oppressed. Exploitation need not disappear
with the bourgeoisie, since it is quite possible that groups of
workers may obtain privileges which amount to an exploitation of
less fortunate groups7.
We see that a whole host of possible historical developments
may follow upon a victorious proletarian revolution. There are
certainly too many possibilities for the application of the method of
historical prophecy. And in particular it must be emphasized that it
would be most unscientific to close our eyes to some possibilities

because we do not like them. Wishful thinking is apparently a
thing that cannot be avoided. But it should not be mistaken for
scientific thinking. And we should also recognize that the allegedly
scientific prophecy provides, for a great number of people, a form
of escape. It provides an escape from our present responsibilities
into a future paradise; and it provides the fitting complement of
this paradise by overstressing the helplessness of the individual in
face of what it describes as the overwhelming and demoniacal
economic forces of the present moment.
III
If we now look a little more closely at these forces, and at our
own present economic system, then we can see that our theoretical
criticism is borne out by experience. But we must be on our guard
against misinterpreting experience in the light of the Marxist
prejudice that ‘socialism’ or ‘communism’ is the only alternative
and the only possible successor to ‘capitalism’. Neither Marx nor
anybody else has ever shown that socialism, in the sense of a
classless society, of ‘an association in which the free development
of each is the warrant for the free development of all’8, is the only
possible alternative to the ruthless exploitation of that economic
system which he first described a century ago (in 1845), and to
which he gave the name ‘capitalism’9. And indeed, if anybody
were attempting to prove that socialism is the only possible
successor to Marx’s unrestrained ‘capitalism’, then we could
simply refute him by pointing to historical facts. For laissez faire
has disappeared from the face of the earth, but it has not been
replaced by a socialist or communist system as Marx understood it.
Only in the Russian sixth of the earth do we find an economic
system where, in accordance with Marx’s prophecy, the means of
production are owned by the state, whose political might however
shows, in opposition to Marx’s prophecy, no inclination to wither
away. But all over the earth, organized political power has begun
to perform far-reaching economic functions. Unrestrained
capitalism has given way to a new historical period, to our own
period of political interventionism, of the economic interference of
the state. Interventionism has assumed various forms. There is the
Russian variety; there is the fascist form of totalitarianism; and
there is the democratic interventionism of England, of the United
States, and of the ‘Smaller Democracies’, led by Sweden10, where
the technology of democratic intervention has reached its highest

level so far. The development which led to this intervention started
in Marx’s own day, with British factory legislation. It made its first
decisive advances with the introduction of the 48-hour week, and
later with the introduction of unemployment insurance and other
forms of social insurance. How utterly absurd it is to identify the
economic system of the modern democracies with the system Marx
called ‘capitalism’ can be seen at a glance, by comparing it with
his 10-point programme for the communist revolution.
If we omit the rather insignificant points of this programme
(for instance, ‘4. Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and
rebels’), then we can say that in the democracies most of these
points have been put into practice, either completely, or to a
considerable degree; and with them, many more important steps,
which Marx had never thought of, have been made in the direction
of social security. I mention only the following points in his
programme: 2. A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.
(Carried out.) 3. Abolition of all right of inheritance. (Largely
realized by heavy death duties. Whether more would be desirable
is at least doubtful.) 6. Central control by the state of the means of
communication and transport. (For military reasons this was
carried out in Central Europe before the war of 1914, without very
beneficial results. It has also been achieved by most of the Smaller
Democracies.) 7. Increase in the number and size of factories and
instruments of production owned by the state .. (Realized in the
Smaller Democracies; whether this is always very beneficial is at
least doubtful.) 10. Free education for all children in public (i.e.
state) schools. Abolition of children’s factory labour in its present
form .. (The first demand is fulfilled in the Smaller Democracies,
and to some extent practically everywhere; the second has been
exceeded.)
A number of points in Marx’s programme (for instance: ‘1.
Abolition of all property in land.’) have not been realized in the
democratic countries. This is why Marxists rightly claim that these
countries have not established ‘socialism’. But if they infer from
this that these countries are still ‘capitalist’ in Marx’s sense, then
they only demonstrate the dogmatic character of their
presupposition that there is no further alternative. This shows how
it is possible to be blinded by the glare of a preconceived system.
Not only is Marxism a bad guide to the future, but it also renders
its followers incapable of seeing what is happening before their

own eyes, in their own historical period, and sometimes even with
their own co-operation.
IV
But it could be asked whether this criticism speaks in any way
against the method of large-scale historical prophecy as such.
Could we not, in principle, so strengthen the premises of the
prophetic argument as to obtain a valid conclusion? Of course we
could do this. It is always possible to obtain any conclusion we like
if only we make our premises sufficiently strong. But the situation
is such that, for nearly every large-scale historical prophecy, we
would have to make such assumptions concerning moral and other
factors of the kind called by Marx ‘ideological’ as are beyond our
ability to reduce to economic factors. But Marx would have been
the first to admit that this would be a highly unscientific
proceeding. His whole method of prophecy depends on the
assumption that ideological influences need not be treated as
independent and unpredictable elements, but that they are
reducible to, and dependent on, observable economic conditions,
and therefore predictable.
It is sometimes admitted even by certain unorthodox Marxists
that the coming of socialism is not merely a matter of historical
development; Marx’s statement that ‘we can shorten and lessen the
birth-pangs’ of the coming of socialism is sufficiently vague to be
interpreted as stating that a mistaken policy might delay the advent
of socialism even for centuries, as compared with the proper policy
which would shorten the time of the development to a minimum.
This interpretation makes it possible even for Marxists to admit
that it will depend largely upon ourselves whether or not the
outcome of a revolution will be a socialist society; that is to say, it
will depend upon our aims, upon our devotion and sincerity, and
upon our intelligence, in other words, upon moral or ‘ideological’
factors. Marx’s prophecy, they may add, is a great source of moral
encouragement, and it is therefore likely to further the
development of socialism. What Marx really tries to show is that
there are only two possibilities: that a terrible world should
continue forever, or that a better world should eventually emerge;
and it is hardly worth our while to contemplate the first alternative
seriously. Therefore Marx’s prophecy is fully justified. For the
more clearly men realize that they can achieve the second
alternative, the more surely will they make a decisive leap from

capitalism to socialism; but a more definite prophecy cannot be
made.
This is an argument which admits the influence of irreducible
moral and ideological factors upon the course of history, and with
it, the inapplicability of the Marxist method. Concerning that part
of the argument which tries to defend Marxism, we must repeat
that nobody has ever shown that there are only two possibilities,
‘capitalism’ and ‘socialism’. With the view that we should not
waste our time in contemplating the eternal continuation of a very
unsatisfactory world, I quite agree. But the alternative need not be
to contemplate the prophesied advent of a better world, or to assist
its birth by propaganda and other irrational means, perhaps even by
violence. It can be for instance, the development of a technology
for the immediate improvement of the world we live in, the
development of a method for piecemeal engineering, for
democratic intervention12. Marxists would of course contend that
this kind of intervention is impossible since history cannot be made
according to rational plans for improving the world. But this theory
has very strange consequences. For if things cannot be improved
by the use of reason, then it would be indeed an historical or
political miracle if the irrational powers of history by themselves
were to produce a better and more rational world13.
Thus we are thrown back to the position that moral and other
ideological factors which do not fall within the scope of scientific
prophecy exert a far-reaching influence upon the course of history.
One of these unpredictable factors is just the influence of social
technology and of political intervention in economic matters. The
social technologist and the piecemeal engineer may plan the
construction of new institutions, or the transformation of old ones;
they may even plan the ways and means of bringing these changes
about; but ‘history’ does not become more predictable by their
doing so. For they do not plan for the whole of society, nor can
they know whether their plans will be carried out; in fact, they will
hardly ever be carried out without great modification, partly
because our experience grows during construction, partly because
we must compromise14. Thus Marx was quite right when he
insisted that ‘history’ cannot be planned on paper. But institutions
can be planned; and they are being planned. Only by planning15,
step by step, for institutions to safeguard freedom, especially
freedom from exploitation, can we hope to achieve a better world.

V
In order to show the practical political significance of Marx’s
historicist theory, I intend to illustrate each of the three chapters
dealing with the three steps of his prophetic argument by a few
remarks on the effects of his historical prophecy upon recent
European history. For these effects have been far-reaching,
because of the influence exercised, in Central and Eastern Europe,
by the two great Marxist Parties, the Communists and the Social
Democrats. Both these parties were entirely unprepared for such a
task as the transformation of society. The Russian Communists,
who found themselves first within reach of power, went ahead,
entirely unaware of the grave problems and the immensity of
sacrifice as well as of suffering which lay ahead. The Social
Democrats of Central Europe, whose chance came a little later,
shrank for many years from the responsibilities which the
Communists had so readily taken upon themselves. They doubted,
probably rightly, whether any people but that of Russia, which had
been most savagely oppressed by Tsarism, would have stood up to
the sufferings and sacrifices demanded from them by revolution,
civil war, and a long period of at first often unsuccessful
experiments. Moreover, during the critical years from 1918 to
1926, the outcome of the Russian experiment appeared to them
most uncertain. And, indeed, there was surely no basis for judging
its prospects. One can say that the split between the Central
European Communists and Social Democrats was one between
those Marxists who had a kind of irrational faith in the final
success of the Russian experiment, and those who were, more
reasonably, sceptical of it. When I say ‘irrational’ and ‘more
reasonably’, I judge them by their own standard, by Marxism; for
according to Marxism, the proletarian revolution should have been
the final outcome of industrialization, and not vice versa16; and it
should have come first in the highly industrialized countries, and
only much later in Russia17.
This remark is not, however, intended as a defence of the
Social Democratic leaders18 whose policy was fully determined by
the Marxist prophecy, by their implicit belief that socialism must
come. But this belief was often combined, in the leaders, with a
hopeless scepticism concerning their own immediate functions and
tasks, and what lay immediately ahead19. They had learned from
Marxism to organize the workers, and to inspire them with a truly
wonderful faith in their task, the liberation of mankind20. But they

were unable to prepare for the realization of their promises. They
had learned their textbooks well, they knew all about ‘scientific
socialism’, and they knew that the preparation of recipes for the
future was unscientific Utopianism. Had not Marx himself
ridiculed a follower of Comte who had criticized him in the Revue
Positiviste for his neglect of practical programmes? ‘The Revue
Positiviste accuses me’, Marx had said21 scornfully, ‘of a
metaphysical treatment of economics, and further—you would
hardly guess it—of confining myself to a merely critical analysis
of actual facts instead of prescribing recipes (Comtist ones,
perhaps?) for the kitchen in which the future is cooked.’ Thus the
Marxist leaders knew better than to waste their time on such
matters as technology. ‘Workers of all countries, unite!’—that
exhausted their practical programme. When the workers of their
countries were united, when there was an opportunity of assuming
the responsibility of government and laying the foundations for a
better world, when their hour had struck, they left the workers high
and dry. The leaders did not know what to do. They waited for the
promised suicide of capitalism. After the inevitable capitalist
collapse, when things had gone thoroughly wrong, when
everything was in dissolution and the risk of discredit and disgrace
to themselves considerably diminished, then they hoped to become
the saviours of mankind. (And, indeed, we should keep in mind the
fact that the success of the Communist in Russia was undoubtedly
made possible, in part, by the terrible things that had happened
before their rise to power.) But when the great depression, which
they first welcomed as the promised collapse, was running its
course, they began to realize that the workers were growing tired
of being fed and put off with interpretations of history22; that it was
not enough to tell them that according to the infallible scientific
socialism of Marx fascism was definitely the last stand of
capitalism before its impending collapse. The suffering masses
needed more than that. Slowly the leaders began to realize the
terrible consequences of a policy of waiting and hoping for the
great political miracle. But it was too late. Their opportunity was
gone.
These remarks are very sketchy. But they give some indication
of the practical consequences of Marx’s prophecy of the coming of
socialism.

Chapter 19: The Social Revolution
The second step of Marx’s prophetic argument has as its most
relevant premise the assumption that capitalism must lead to an
increase of wealth and misery; of wealth in the numerically
declining bourgeoisie, and of misery in the numerically increasing
working class. This assumption will be criticized in the next
chapter but is here taken for granted. The conclusions drawn from
it can be divided into two parts. The first part is a prophecy
concerning the development of the class structure of capitalism. It
affirms that all classes apart from the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat, and especially the so-called middle classes, are bound
to disappear, and that, in consequence of the increasing tension
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, the latter will become
increasingly class-conscious and united. The second part is the
prophecy that this tension cannot possibly be removed, and that it
will lead to a proletarian social revolution.
I believe that neither of the two conclusions follows from the
premise. My criticism will be, in the main, similar to that
propounded in the last chapter; that is to say, I shall try to show
that Marx’s argument neglects a great number of possible
developments.
I
Let us consider at once the first conclusion, i.e. the prophecy
that all classes are bound to disappear, or to become insignificant,
except the bourgeoisie and the proletariat whose class
consciousness and solidarity must increase. It must be admitted
that the premise, Marx’s theory of increasing wealth and misery,
provides indeed for the disappearance of a certain middle class,
that of the weaker capitalists arid the petty bourgeoisie. ‘Each
capitalist lays many of his fellows low’, as Marx puts it1; and these
fellow capitalists may indeed be reduced to the position of wageearners, which for Marx is the same as proletarians. This
movement is part of the increase of wealth, the accumulation of
more and more capital, and its concentration and centralization in
fewer and fewer hands. An analogous fate is meted out to ‘the
lower strata of the middle class’, as Marx says2. ‘The small
tradespeople, shopkeepers, and retired tradesmen generally, the
handicraftsmen and the peasants, all these sink gradually into the
proletariat; partly because their small capital, insufficient as it is
for the scale on which modern industry is conducted is

overwhelmed in the competition with the bigger capitalists partly
because their specialized skill is rendered worthless by new means
of production. Thus the proletariat is recruited from all classes of
the population.’ This description is certainly fairly accurate,
especially so far as handicrafts are concerned; and it is also true
that many proletarians come from peasant stock.
But admirable as Marx’s observations are, the picture is
defective. The movement he investigated is an industrial
movement; his ‘capitalist’ is the industrial capitalist, his
‘proletarian’ the industrial worker. And in spite of the fact that
many industrial workers come from peasant stock, this does not
mean that the farmers and peasants, for instance, are all gradually
reduced to the position of industrial workers. Even the agricultural
labourers are not necessarily united with the industrial workers by
a common feeling of solidarity and class consciousness. ‘The
dispersion of the rural workers over large areas’, Marx admits3,
‘breaks down their power of resistance at the very time when the
concentration of capital in a few hands increases the power of
resistance of the urban workers.’ This hardly suggests unification
in one class-conscious whole. It shows, rather, that there is at least
a possibility of division, and that the agricultural worker might
sometimes be too dependent upon his master, the farmer or
peasant, to make common cause with the industrial proletariat. But
that farmers or peasants may easily choose to support the
bourgeoisie rather than the workers was mentioned by Marx
himself4; and a workers’ programme such as the one of the
Manifesto5, whose first demand is the ‘abolition of all property in
land’, is hardly designed to counteract this tendency.
This shows that it is at least possible that the rural middle
classes may not disappear, and that the rural proletariat may not
merge with the industrial proletariat. But this is not all. Marx’s
own analysis shows that it is vitally important for the bourgeoisie
to foment division among the wage-earners; and as Marx himself
has seen, this might be achieved in at least two ways. One way is
the creation of a new middle class, of a privileged group of wageearners who would feel superior to the manual worker6 and at the
same time dependent upon the rulers’ mercy. The other way is the
utilization of that lowest stratum of society which Marx christened
the ‘rabble-proletariat’. This is, as pointed out by Marx, the
recruiting ground for criminals who may be ready to sell
themselves to the class enemy. Increasing misery must tend, as he

admits, to swell the numbers of this class; a development which
will hardly contribute to the solidarity of all the oppressed.
But even the solidarity of the class of industrial workers is not
a necessary consequence of increasing misery. Admittedly,
increasing misery must produce resistance, and it is even likely to
produce rebellious outbreaks. But the assumption of our argument
is that the misery cannot be alleviated until victory has been won in
the social revolution. This implies that the resisting workers will be
beaten again and again in their fruitless attempts to better their lot.
But such a development need not make the workers classconscious in the Marxist sense7, i.e. proud of their class and
assured of their mission; it may make them, rather, class-conscious
in the sense of being conscious of the fact that they belong to a
beaten army. And it probably will do so, if the workers do not find
strength in the realization that their numbers as well as their
potential economic powers continue to grow. This might be the
case if, as Marx prophesied, all classes, apart from their own and
that of the capitalists, were to show a tendency to disappear. But
since, as we have seen, this prophecy need not come true, it is
possible that the solidarity of even the industrial workers may be
undermined by defeatism.
Thus, as opposed to Marx’s prophecy which insists that there
must develop a neat division between two classes, we find that on
his own assumptions, the following class structure may possibly
develop: (1) bourgeoisie, (2) big landed proprietors, (3) other
landowners, (4) rural workers, (5) new middle class, (6) industrial
workers, (7) rabble proletariat. (Any other combination of these
classes may, of course, develop too.) And we find, furthermore,
that such a development may possibly undermine the unity of (6).
We can say, therefore, that the first conclusion of the second
step in Marx’s argument does not follow. But as in my criticism of
the third step, here also I must say that I do not intend to replace
Marx’s prophecy by another one. I do not assert that the prophecy
cannot come true, or that the alternative developments I have
described will come to pass. I only assert that they may come to
pass. (And, indeed, this possibility can hardly be denied by
members of the radical Marxist wings who use the accusation of
treachery, bribery, and insufficient class solidarity as favourite
devices for explaining away developments which do not conform
to the prophetic schedule.) That such things may happen should be
clear to anybody who has observed the development which has led

to fascism, in which all the possibilities I have mentioned played a
part. But the mere possibility is sufficient to destroy the first
conclusion reached in the second step of Marx’s argument.
This of course affects the second conclusion, the prophecy of
the coining social revolution. But before I can enter into a criticism
of the way in which this prophecy is arrived at, it is necessary to
discuss at some length the role played by it within the whole
argument, as well as Marx’s use of the term ‘social revolution’.
II
What Marx meant when he spoke of the social revolution
seems at first sight clear enough. His ‘social revolution of the
proletariat’ is a historical concept. It denotes the more or less rapid
transition from the historical period of capitalism to that of
socialism. In other words, it is the name of a transitional period of
class struggle between the two main classes, down to the ultimate
victory of the workers. When asked whether the term ‘social
revolution’ implied a violent civil war between the two classes,
Marx answered8 that this was not necessarily implied, adding,
however, that the prospects of avoiding civil war were,
unfortunately, not very bright. And he might have added further
that, from the point of view of historical prophecy, the question
appears to be perhaps not quite irrelevant, but at any rate of
secondary importance. Social life is violent, Marxism insists, and
the class war claims its victims every day9. What really matters is
the result, socialism. To achieve this result is the essential
characteristic of the ‘social revolution’.
Now if we could take it as established, or as intuitively certain,
that capitalism will be followed by socialism, then this explanation
of the term ‘social revolution’ might be quite satisfactory. But
since we must make use of the doctrine of social revolution as a
part of that scientific argument by which we try to establish the
coming of socialism, the explanation is very unsatisfactory indeed.
If in such an argument we try to characterize the social revolution
as the transition to socialism, then the argument becomes as
circular as that of the doctor who was “asked to justify his
prediction of the death of a patient, and had to confess that he
knew neither the symptoms nor anything else of the malady—only
that it would turn into a ‘fatal malady’. (If the patient did not die,
then it was not yet the ‘fatal malady’; and if a revolution does not
lead to socialism, then it is not yet the ‘social revolution’.) We can

also give to this criticism the simple form that in none of the three
steps of the prophetic argument must we assume anything
whatever that is deduced only in a later step.
These considerations show that, for a proper reconstruction of
Marx’s argument, we must find such a characterization of the
social revolution as does not refer to socialism, and as permits the
social revolution to play its part in this argument as well as
possible. A characterization which fulfils these conditions appears
to be this. The social revolution is an attempt of a largely united
proletariat to conquer complete political power, undertaken with
the firm resolution not to shrink from violence, should violence be
necessary for achieving this aim, and to resist any effort of its
opponents to regain political influence. This characterization is
free from the difficulties just mentioned; it fits the third step of the
argument in so far as this third step is valid, giving it that degree of
plausibility which the step undoubtedly possesses; and it is, as will
be shown, in agreement with Marxism, and especially with its
historicist tendency to avoid a definite10 statement about whether
or not violence will actually be used in this phase of history.
But although if regarded as an historical prophecy the proposed
characterization is indefinite about the use of violence, it is
important to realize that it is not so from a moral or legal point of
view. Considered from such a point of view, the characterization of
the social revolution here proposed undoubtedly makes of it a
violent uprising; for the question whether or not violence is
actually used is less significant than the intention; and we have
assumed a firm resolution not to shrink from violence should it be
necessary for achieving the aims of the movement. To say that the
resolution not to shrink from violence is decisive for the character
of the social revolution as a violent uprising is in agreement not
only with the moral or legal point of view, but also with the
ordinary view of the matter. For if a man is determined to use
violence in order to achieve his aims, then we may say that to all
intents and purposes he adopts a violent attitude, whether or not
violence is actually used in a particular case. Admittedly, in trying
to predict a future action of this man, we should have to be just as
indefinite as Marxism, stating that we do not know whether or not
he will actually resort to force. (Thus our characterization agrees in
this point with the Marxist view.) But this lack of definiteness
clearly disappears if we do not attempt historical prophecy but try
to characterize his attitude in the ordinary wav.

Now I wish to make it quite clear that it is this prophecy of a
possibly violent revolution which I consider, from the point of
view of practical politics, by far the most harmful element in
Marxism; and I think it will be better if I briefly explain the reason
for my opinion before I proceed with my analysis.
I am not in all cases and under all circumstances against a
violent revolution. I believe with some medieval and Renaissance
Christian thinkers who taught the admissibility of tyrannicide that
there may indeed, under a tyranny, be no other possibility, and that
a violent revolution may be justified. But I also believe that any
such revolution should have as its only aim the establishment of a
democracy; and by a democracy I do not mean something as vague
as ‘the rule of the people’ or ‘the rule of the majority’, but a set of
institutions (among them especially general elections, i.e. the right
of the people to dismiss their government) which permit public
control of the rulers and their dismissal by the ruled, and which
make it possible for the ruled to obtain reforms without using
violence, even against the will of the rulers. In other words, the use
of violence is justified only under a tyranny which makes reforms
without violence impossible, and it should have only one aim, that
is, to bring about a state of affairs which makes reforms without
violence possible.
I do not believe that we should ever attempt to achieve more
than that by violent means. For I believe that such an attempt
would involve the risk of destroying all prospects of reasonable
reform. The prolonged use of violence may lead in the end to the
loss of freedom, since it is liable to bring about not a dispassionate
rule of reason, but the rule of the strong man. A violent revolution
which tries to attempt more than the destruction of tyranny is at
least as likely to bring about another tyranny as it is likely to
achieve its real aims.
There is only one further use of violence in political quarrels
which I should consider justified. I mean the resistance, once
democracy has been attained, to any attack (whether from within
or without the state) against the democratic constitution and the use
of democratic methods. Any such attack, especially if it comes
from the government in power, or if it is tolerated by it, should be
resisted by all loyal citizens, even to the use of violence. In fact,
the working of democracy rests largely upon the understanding
that a government which attempts to misuse its powers and to
establish itself as a tyranny (or which tolerates the establishment of

a tyranny by anybody else) outlaws itself, and that the citizens
have not only a right but also a duty to consider the action of such
a government as a crime, and its members as a dangerous gang of
criminals. But I hold that such violent resistance to attempts to
overthrow democracy should be unambiguously defensive. No
shadow of doubt must be left that the only aim of the resistance is
to save democracy. A threat of making use of the situation for the
establishment of a counter-tyranny is just as criminal as the
original attempt to introduce a tyranny; the use of such a threat,
even if made with the candid intention of saving democracy by
deterring its enemies, would therefore be a very bad method of
defending democracy; indeed, such a threat would confuse the
ranks of its defenders in an hour of peril, and would therefore be
likely to help the enemy.
These remarks indicate that a successful democratic policy
demands from the defenders the observance of certain rules. A few
such rules will be listed later in this chapter; here I only wish to
make it clear why I consider the Marxist attitude towards violence
one of the most important points to be dealt with in any analysis of
Marx.
III
According to their interpretation of the social revolution, we
may distinguish between two main groups of Marxists, a radical
wing and a moderate wing (corresponding roughly, but not
precisely11, to the Communist and the Social Democratic parties).
Marxists often decline to discuss the question whether or not a
violent revolution would be ‘justified’; they say that they are not
moralists, but scientists, and that they do not deal with speculations
about what ought to be, but with the facts of what is or will be. In
other words, they are historical prophets who confine themselves
to the question of what will happen. But let us assume that we have
succeeded in persuading them to discuss the justification of the
social revolution. In this case, I believe that we should find all
Marxists agreeing, in principle, with the old view that violent
revolutions are justified only if they are directed against a tyranny.
From here on, the opinions of the two wings differ.
The radical wing insists that, according to Marx, all class rule
is necessarily a dictatorship, i.e. a tyranny12. A real democracy can
therefore be attained only by the establishment of a classless
society, by overthrowing, if necessary violently, the capitalist

dictatorship. The moderate wing does not agree with this view, but
insists that democracy can to some extent be realized even under
capitalism, and that it is therefore possible to conduct the social
revolution by peaceful and gradual reforms. But even this
moderate wing insists that such a peaceful development is
uncertain; it points out that it is the bourgeoisie which is likely to
resort to force, if faced with the prospect of being defeated by the
workers on the democratic battlefield; and it contends that in this
case the workers would be justified in retaliating, and in
establishing their rule by violent means13. Both wings claim to
represent the true Marxism of Marx, and in a way, both are right.
For, as mentioned above, Marx’s views in this matter were
somewhat ambiguous, because of his historicist approach; over and
above this, he seems to have changed his views during the course
of his life, starting as a radical and later adopting a more moderate
position14.
I shall examine the radical position first, since it appears to me
the only one which fits in with Capital and the whole trend of
Marx’s prophetic argument. For it is the main doctrine of Capital
that the antagonism between capitalist and worker must necessarily
increase, and that there is no compromise possible, so that
capitalism can only be destroyed, not improved. It will be best to
quote the fundamental passage of Capital in which Marx finally
sums up the ‘historical tendency of capitalist accumulation’. He
writes15: ‘Along with the steady decrease in the number of
capitalist magnates who usurp and monopolize all the advantages
of this development, there grows the extent of misery, oppression,
servitude, degradation, and exploitation; but at the same time, there
rises the rebellious indignation of the working class which is
steadily growing in number, and which is being disciplined,
unified, and organized by the very mechanism of the capitalist
method of production. Ultimately, the monopoly of capital
becomes a fetter upon the mode of production which has flourished
with it, and under it. Both the centralization in a few hands of the
means of production, and the social organization of labour, reach a
point where their capitalist cloak becomes a strait-jacket. It bursts
asunder. The hour of capitalist private property has struck. The
expropriators are expropriated.’
In view of this fundamental passage, there can be little doubt
that the core of Marx’s teaching in Capital was the impossibility of
reforming capitalism, and the prophecy of its violent overthrow; a

doctrine corresponding to that of the radical wing. And this
doctrine fits into our prophetic argument as well as can be. For if
we grant not only the premise of the second step but the first
conclusion as well, then the prophecy of the social revolution
would indeed follow, in accordance with the passage we have
quoted from Capital. (And the victory of the workers would follow
too, as pointed out in the last chapter.) Indeed, it seems hard to
envisage a fully united and class-conscious working class which
would not in the end, if their misery cannot be mitigated by any
other means, make a determined attempt to overthrow the social
order. But this does not, of course, save the second conclusion. For
we have already shown that the first conclusion is invalid; and
from the premise alone, from the theory of increasing wealth and
misery, the inevitability of the social revolution cannot be derived.
As pointed out in our analysis of the first conclusion, all we can
say is that rebellious outbreaks may be unavoidable; but since we
can be sure neither of class unity nor of a developed class
consciousness among the workers, we cannot identify such
outbreaks with the social revolution. (They need not be victorious
either, so that the assumption that they represent the social
revolution would not fit in with the third step.)
As opposed to the radical position which at least fits quite well
into the prophetic argument, the moderate position destroys it
completely. But as was said before, it too has the support of
Marx’s authority. Marx lived long enough to see reforms carried
out which, according to his theory, should have been impossible.
But it never occurred to him that these improvements in the
workers’ lot were at the same time refutations of his theory. His
ambiguous historicist view of the social revolution permitted him
to interpret these reforms as its prelude16 or even as its beginning.
As Engels tells us17, Marx reached the conclusion that in England,
at any rate, ‘the inevitable social revolution might be effected
entirely by peaceful and legal means. He certainly never forgot to
add that he hardly expected the English ruling class to submit,
without a “pro-slavery rebellion”, to this peaceful and legal
revolution’. This report agrees with a letter18 in which Marx wrote,
only three years before his death: ‘My party .. considers an English
revolution not necessary but—according to historic precedents—
possible.’ It should be noted that in the first at least of these
statements. the theory of the ‘moderate wing’ is clearly expressed;

the theory, namely, that should the ruling class not submit,
violence would be unavoidable.
These moderate theories seem to me to destroy the whole
prophetic argument19. They imply the possibility of a compromise,
of a gradual reform of capitalism, and therefore, of a decreasing
class-antagonism. But the sole basis of the prophetic argument is
the assumption of an increasing class-antagonism. There is no
logical necessity why a gradual reform, achieved by compromise,
should lead to the complete destruction of the capitalist system;
why the workers, who have learned by experience that they can
improve their lot by gradual reform, should not prefer to stick to
this method, even if it does not yield ‘complete victory’, i.e. the
submission of the ruling class; why they should not compromise
with the bourgeoisie and leave it in possession of the means of
production rather than risk all their gains by making demands
liable to lead to violent clashes. Only if we assume that ‘the
proletarians have nothing to lose but their fetters’20, only if we
assume that the law of increasing misery is valid, or that it at least
makes improvements impossible, only then can we prophesy that
the workers will be forced to make an attempt to overthrow the
whole system. An evolutionary interpretation of the ‘social
revolution’ thus destroys the whole Marxist argument, from the
first step to the last; all that is left of Marxism would be the
historicist approach. If an historical prophecy is still attempted,
then it must be based upon an entirely new argument.
If we try to construct such a modified argument in accordance
with Marx’s later views and with those of the moderate wing,
preserving as much of the original theory as possible, then we
arrive at an argument based entirely upon the claim that the
working class represents now, or will one day represent, the
majority of the people. The argument would run like this.
Capitalism will be transformed by a ‘social revolution’, by which
we now mean nothing but the advance of the class struggle
between capitalists and workers. This revolution may either
proceed by gradual and democratic methods, or it may be violent,
or it may be gradual and violent in alternate stages. All this will
depend upon the resistance of the bourgeoisie. But in any case, and
particularly if the development is a peaceful one, it must end with
the workers assuming ‘the position of the ruling class’21, as the
Manifesto says; they must ‘win the battle of democracy’; for ‘the

proletarian movement is the self-conscious independent movement
of the immense majority, in the interest of the immense majority’.
It is important to realize that even in this moderate and
modified form, the prediction is untenable. The reason is this. The
theory of increasing misery must be given up if the possibility of
gradual reform is admitted; but with it, even the semblance of a
justification for the assertion that the industrial workers must one
day form the ‘immense majority’ disappears. I do not wish to
imply that this assertion would really follow from the Marxist
theory of increasing misery, since this theory has never taken
sufficient heed of the farmers and peasants. But if the law of
increasing misery, supposed to reduce the middle class to the level
of the proletariat, is invalid, then we must be prepared to find that a
very considerable middle class continues to exist (or that a new
middle class has arisen) and that it may co-operate with the other
non-proletarian classes against a bid for power by the workers; and
nobody can say for certain what the outcome of such a contest
would be. Indeed, statistics no longer show any tendency for the
number of industrial workers to increase in relation to the other
classes of the population. There is, rather, the opposite tendency, in
spite of the fact that the accumulation of instruments of production
continues. This fact alone refutes the validity of the modified
prophetic argument. All that remains of it is the important
observation (which is, however, not up to the pretentious standards
of a historicist prophecy) that social reforms are carried out
largely22 under the pressure of the oppressed, or (if this term is
preferred) under the pressure of class struggle; that is to say, that
the emancipation of the oppressed will be largely the achievement
of the oppressed themselves23.
IV
The prophetic argument is untenable, and irreparable, in all its
interpretations, whether radical or moderate. But for a full
understanding of this situation, it is not enough to refute the
modified prophecy; it is also necessary to examine the ambiguous
attitude towards the problem of violence which we can observe in
both the radical and the moderate Marxist parties. This attitude has,
I assert, a considerable influence upon the question whether or not
the ‘battle of democracy’ will be won; for wherever the moderate
Marxist wing has won a general election, or come close to it, one
of the reasons seems to have been that they attracted large sections

of the middle class. This was due to their humanitarianism, to their
stand for freedom and against oppression. But the systematic
ambiguity of their attitude towards violence not only tends to
neutralize this attraction, but it also directly furthers the interest of
the anti-democrats, the anti-humanitarians, the fascists.
There are two closely connected ambiguities in the Marxist
doctrine, and both are important from this point of view. The one is
an ambiguous attitude towards violence, founded upon the
historicist approach. The other is the ambiguous way in which
Marxists speak about ‘the conquest of political power by the
proletariat’, as the Manifesto puts it24. What does this mean? It
may mean, and it is sometimes so interpreted, that the workers’
party has the harmless and obvious aim of every democratic party,
that of obtaining a majority, and of forming a government. But it
may mean, and it is often hinted by Marxists that it does mean, that
the party, once in power, intends to entrench itself in this position;
that is to say, that it will use its majority vote in such a way as to
make it very difficult for others ever to regain power by ordinary
democratic means. The difference between these two
interpretations is most important. If a party which is at a certain
time in the minority plans to suppress the other party, whether by
violence or by means of a majority vote, then it recognizes by
implication the right of the present majority party to do the same. It
loses any moral right to complain about oppression; and, indeed, it
plays into the hands of those groups within the present ruling party
who wish to suppress the opposition by force.
I may call these two ambiguities briefly the ambiguity of
violence and the ambiguity of power-conquest. Both are rooted not
only in the vagueness of the historicist approach, but also in the
Marxist theory of the state. If the state is, essentially, a class
tyranny, then, on the one hand, violence is permissible, and on the
other, all that can be done is to replace the dictatorship of the
bourgeoisie by that of the proletariat. To worry much about formal
democracy merely shows lack of historical sense; after all
‘democracy is .. only one of the stages in the course of the
historical development’, as Lenin says25.
The two ambiguities play their role in the tactical doctrines of
both the radical and the moderate wings. This is understandable,
since the systematic use of the ambiguity enables them to extend
the realm from which prospective followers may be recruited. This
is a tactical advantage which may, however, easily lead to a

disadvantage at the most critical moment; it may lead to a split
whenever the most radical members think that the hour has struck
for taking violent action. The way in which the radical wing may
make a systematic use of the ambiguity of violence may be
illustrated by the following extracts taken from Parkes’ recent
critical dissection of Marxism26. ‘Since the Communist Party of the
United States now declares not only that it does not now advocate
revolution, but also that it never did advocate revolution, it may be
advisable to quote a few sentences from the program of the
Communist International (drafted in 1928).’ Parkes then quotes
among others the following passages from this programme: ‘The
Conquest of power by the proletariat does not mean peacefully
“capturing” the ready-made bourgeois state by means of
parliamentary majority ... The conquest of power .. is the violent
overthrow of bourgeois power, the destruction of the capitalist
state apparatus ... The Party .. is confronted with the task of leading
the masses to a direct attack upon the bourgeois state. This is done
by .. propaganda .. and .. mass action ... This mass action includes
.. finally, the general strike conjointly with armed insurrection ...
The latter form .. which is the supreme form, must be conducted
according to the rules of war ..’ One sees, from these quotations,
that this part of the programme is quite unambiguous; but this does
not prevent the party from making a systematic use of the
ambiguity of violence, withdrawing, if the tactical situation27
demands it, towards a non-violent interpretation of the term ‘social
revolution’; and this in spite of the concluding paragraph of the
Manifesto28 (which is retained by the programme of 1928): ‘The
Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly
declare that their aims can be attained only by the forcible
overthrow of all the existing social conditions ...’
But the way in which the moderate wing has systematically
used the ambiguity of violence as well as that of power-conquest is
even more important. It has been developed especially by Engels,
on the basis of Marx’s more moderate views quoted above, and it
has become a tactical doctrine which has greatly influenced later
developments. The doctrine I have in mind might be presented as
follows29: We Marxists much prefer a peaceful and democratic
development towards socialism, if we can have it. But as political
realists we foresee the probability that the bourgeoisie will not
quietly stand by when we are within reach of attaining the
majority. They will rather attempt to destroy democracy. In this

case, we must not flinch, but fight back, and conquer political
power. And since this development is a probable one, we must
prepare the workers for it; otherwise we should betray our cause.
Here is one of Engels’ passages30 on the matter: ‘For the moment ..
legality .. is working so well in our favour that we should be mad
to abandon it as long as it lasts. It remains to be seen whether it
will not be the bourgeoisie .. which will abandon it first in order to
crush us with violence. Take the first shot, gentlemen of the
bourgeoisie! Never doubt it, they will be the first to fire. One fine
day the .. bourgeoisie will grow tired of .. watching the rapidly
increasing strength of socialism, and will have recourse to
illegality and violence.’ What will happen then is left
systematically ambiguous. And this ambiguity is used as a threat;
for in later passages, Engels addresses the ‘gentlemen of the
bourgeoisie’ in the following way: ‘If .. you break the constitution
.. then the Social Democratic Party is free to act, or to refrain from
acting, against you—whatever it likes best. What it is going to do,
however, it will hardly give away to you to-day!’
It is interesting to see how widely this doctrine differs from the
original conception of Marxism which predicted that the revolution
would come as the result of the increasing pressure of capitalism
upon the workers, and not as the result of the increasing pressure
of a successful working-class movement upon capitalists. This
most remarkable change of front31 shows the influence of the
actual social development which turned out to be one of decreasing
misery. But Engels’ new doctrine, which leaves the revolutionary,
or more precisely, the counter-revolutionary, initiative to the ruling
class, is tactically absurd, and doomed to failure. The original
Marxist theory taught that the workers’ revolution will break out at
the depth of a depression, i.e. at a moment when the political
system is weakened by the breakdown of the economic system, a
situation which would contribute greatly to the victory of the
workers. But if the ‘gentlemen of the bourgeoisie ‘are invited to
take the first shot, is it conceivable that they will be stupid enough
not to choose their moment wisely? Will they not make proper
preparations for the war they are going to wage? And since,
according to the theory, they hold the power, will such a
preparation not mean the mobilization of forces against which the
workers can have no slightest chance of victory? Such criticism
cannot be met by amending the theory so that the workers should
not wait until the other side strikes but try to anticipate them, since,

on its own assumption, it must always be easy for those in power
to be ahead in their preparations—to prepare rifles, if the workers
prepare sticks, guns if they prepare rifles, dive bombers if they
prepare guns, etc.
V
But this criticism, practical as it is, and corroborated by
experience, is only superficial. The main defects of the doctrine lie
deeper. The criticism I now wish to offer attempts to show that
both the presupposition of the doctrine and its tactical
consequences are such that they are likely to produce exactly that
anti-democratic reaction of the bourgeoisie which the theory
predicts, yet claims (with ambiguity) to abhor: the strengthening of
the anti-democratic element in the bourgeoisie, and, in
consequence, civil war. And we know that this may lead to defeat,
and to fascism.
The criticism I have in mind is, briefly, that Engels’ tactical
doctrine, and, more generally, the ambiguities of violence and of
power-conquest, make the working of democracy impossible, once
they are adopted by an important political party. I base this
criticism on the contention that democracy can work only if the
main parties adhere to a view of its functions which may be
summarized in some rules such as these (cp. also section II of
chapter 7):
(1) Democracy cannot be fully characterized as the rule of the
majority, although the institution of general elections is most
important. For a majority might rule in a tyrannical way. (The
majority of those who are less than 6 ft. high may decide that the
minority of those over 6 ft. shall pay all taxes.) In a democracy, the
powers of the rulers must be limited; and the criterion of a
democracy is this: In a democracy, the rulers—that is to say, the
government—can be dismissed by the ruled without bloodshed.
Thus if the men in power do not safeguard those institutions which
secure to the minority the possibility of working for a peaceful
change, then their rule is a tyranny.
(2) We need only distinguish between two forms of
government, viz. such as possess institutions of this kind, and all
others; i.e. democracies and tyrannies.
(3) A consistent democratic constitution should exclude only
one type of change in the legal system, namely a change which
would endanger its democratic character.

(4) In a democracy, the full protection of minorities should not
extend to those who violate the law, and especially not to those
who incite others to the violent overthrow of the democracy32.
(5) A policy of framing institutions to safeguard democracy
must always proceed on the assumption that there may be
antidemocratic tendencies latent among the ruled as well as among
the rulers.
(6) If democracy is destroyed, all rights are destroyed. Even if
certain economic advantages enjoyed by the ruled should persist,
they would persist only on sufferance33.
(7) Democracy provides an invaluable battle-ground for any
reasonable reform, since it permits reform without violence. But if
the preservation of democracy is not made the first consideration in
any particular battle fought out on this battle-ground, then the
latent anti-democratic tendencies which are always present (and
which appeal to those who suffer under the strain of civilization, as
we called it in chapter 10) may bring about a breakdown of
democracy. If an understanding of these principles is not yet
developed, its development must be fought for. The opposite
policy may prove fatal; it may bring about the loss of the most
important battle, the battle for democracy itself.
As opposed to such a policy, that of Marxist parties can be
characterized as one of making the workers suspicious of
democracy. ‘In reality the state is nothing more’, says Engels34,
‘than a machine for the oppression of one class by another, and this
holds for a democratic republic no less than for a monarchy.’ But
such views must produce:
(a) A policy of blaming democracy for all the evils which it
does not prevent, instead of recognizing that the democrats are to
be blamed, and the opposition usually no less than the majority.
(Every opposition has the majority it deserves.)
(b) A policy of educating the ruled to consider the state not as
theirs, but as belonging to the rulers.
(c) A policy of telling them that there is only one way to
improve things, that of the complete conquest of power. But this
neglects the one really important thing about democracy, that it
checks and balances power.
Such a policy amounts to doing the work of the enemies of the
open society; it provides them with an unwitting fifth column. And
against the Manifesto which says35 ambiguously: ‘The first step in
the revolution of the working class is to raise the proletariat to the

position of the ruling class—to win the battle of democracy’, I
assert that if this is accepted as the first step, then the battle of
democracy will be lost.
These are the general consequences of Engels’ tactical
doctrines, and of the ambiguities grounded in the theory of the
social revolution. Ultimately, they are merely the last
consequences of Plato’s way of posing the problem of politics by
asking ‘who should rule the state?’ (cp. chapter 7). It is high time
for us to learn that the question ‘who is to wield the power in the
state?’ matters only little as compared with the question ‘how is the
power wielded?’ and ‘how much power is wielded?’ We must learn
that in the long run, all political problems are institutional
problems, problems of the legal framework rather than of persons,
and that progress towards more equality can be safeguarded only
by the institutional control of power.
VI
As in the previous chapter, I shall now illustrate the second
step by showing something of the way in which the prophecy has
influenced recent historical developments. All political parties
have some sort of ‘vested interest’ in their opponent’s unpopular
moves. They live by them and are therefore liable to dwell upon, to
emphasize, and even to look forward to them. They may even
encourage the political mistakes of their opponents as long as they
can do so without becoming involved in the responsibility for
them. This, together with Engels’ theory, has led some Marxist
parties to look forward to the political moves made by their
opponents against democracy. Instead of fighting such moves tooth
and nail, they were pleased to tell their followers: ‘See what these
people do. That is what they call democracy. That is what they call
freedom and equality! Remember it when the day of reckoning
comes.’ (An ambiguous phrase which may refer to election day or
to the day of revolution.) This policy of letting one’s opponents
expose themselves must, if extended to moves against democracy,
lead to disaster. It is a policy of talking big and doing nothing in
the face of real and increasing danger to democratic institutions. It
is a policy of talking war and acting peace; and it taught the
fascists the invaluable method of talking peace and acting war.
There is no doubt about the way in which the ambiguity just
mentioned played into the hands of those fascist groups who
wanted to destroy democracy. For we must reckon with the

possibility that there will be such groups, and that their influence
within the so-called bourgeoisie will depend largely on the policy
adopted by the workers’ parties.
For instance, let us consider more closely the use made in the
political struggle of the threat of revolution or even of political
strikes (as opposed to wage disputes, etc.). As explained above, the
decisive question here would be whether such means are used as
offensive weapons or solely for the defence of democracy. Within
a democracy, they would be justified as a purely defensive
weapon, and when resolutely applied in connection with a
defensive and unambiguous demand they have been successfully
used in this way. (Remember the quick breakdown of Kapp’s
putsch.) But if used as an offensive weapon they must lead to a
strengthening of the anti-democratic tendencies in the opponent’s
camp, since they clearly make democracy unworkable.
Furthermore, such use must make the weapon ineffective for
defence. If you use the whip even when the dog is good, then it
won’t work if you need it to deter him from being bad. The
defence of democracy must consist in making anti-democratic
experiments too costly for those who try them; much more costly
than a democratic compromise ... The use by the workers of any
kind of non-democratic pressure is likely to lead to a similar, or
even to an anti-democratic, counter-pressure—to provoke a move
against democracy. Such an antidemocratic move on the part of the
rulers is, of course, a much more serious and dangerous thing than
a similar move on the part of the ruled. It would be the task of the
workers to fight this dangerous move resolutely, to stop it in its
inconspicuous beginnings. But how can they now fight in the name
of democracy? Their own anti-democratic action must provide
their enemies, and those of democracy, with an opportunity.
The facts of the development described can, if one wishes, be
interpreted differently; they may lead to the conclusion that
democracy is ‘no good’. This is indeed a conclusion which many
Marxists have drawn. After having been defeated in what they
believed to be the democratic struggle (which they had lost in the
moment they formulated their tactical doctrine), they said: ‘We
have been too lenient, too humane—next time we will make a
really bloody revolution!’ It is as if a man who loses a boxing
match should conclude: boxing is no good—I should have used a
club ... The fact is that the Marxists taught the theory of class war
to the workers, but the practice of it to the reactionary diehards of

the bourgeoisie. Marx talked war. His opponents listened
attentively; then they began to talk peace and accuse the workers
of belligerency; this charge the Marxists could not deny, since
class war was their slogan. And the fascists acted.
So far, the analysis mainly covers certain more ‘radical’ Social
Democratic parties who based their policy entirely upon Engels’
ambiguous tactical doctrine. The disastrous effects of Engels’
tactics were increased in their case by the lack of a practical
programme discussed in the last chapter. But the Communists too
adopted the tactics here criticized in certain countries and at certain
periods, especially where the other workers’ parties, for instance
the Social Democrats or the Labour Party, observed the democratic
rules.
But the position was different with the Communists in so far as
they had a programme. It was: ‘Copy Russia!’ This made them
more definite in their revolutionary doctrines as well as in their
assertion that democracy merely means the dictatorship of the
bourgeoisie36. According to this assertion, not much could be lost
and something would be gained if that hidden dictatorship became
an open one, apparent to all; for this could only bring the
revolution nearer37. They even hoped that a totalitarian dictatorship
in Central Europe would speed up matters. After all, since the
revolution was bound to come, fascism could only be one of the
means of bringing it about; and this was more particularly so since
the revolution was clearly long overdue. Russia had already had it
in spite of its backward economic conditions. Only the vain hopes
created by democracy38 were holding it back in the more advanced
countries. Thus the destruction of democracy through the fascists
could only promote the revolution by achieving the ultimate
disillusionment of the workers in regard to democratic methods.
With this, the radical wing of Marxism39 felt that it had discovered
the ‘essence’ and the ‘true historical role’ of fascism. Fascism was,
essentially, the last stand of the bourgeoisie. Accordingly, the
Communists did not fight when the fascists seized power. (Nobody
expected the Social Democrats to fight.) For the Communists were
sure that the proletarian revolution was overdue and that the fascist
interlude, necessary for its speeding up40, could not last longer than
a few months. Thus no action was required from the Communists.
They were harmless. There was never a ‘communist danger’ to the
fascist conquest of power. As Einstein once emphasized, of all

organized groups of the community, it was only the Church, or
rather a section of the Church, which seriously offered resistance.

Chapter 20: Capitalism And Its Fate
According to Marxist doctrine, capitalism is labouring under
inner contradictions that threaten to bring about its downfall. A
minute analysis of these contradictions and of the historical
movement which they force upon society constitutes the first step
of Marx’s prophetic argument. This step is not only the most
important of his whole theory, it is also the one on which he spent
most of his labour, since practically the whole of the three volumes
of Capital (over 2, 200 pages in the original edition1) is devoted to
its elaboration. It is also the least abstract step of the argument
since it is based upon a descriptive analysis, supported by statistics,
of the economic system of his time—that of unrestrained
capitalism2. As Lenin puts it: ‘Marx deduces the inevitability of the
transformation of capitalist society into socialism wholly and
exclusively from the economic law of the movement of
contemporary society.’
Before proceeding to explain in some detail the first step of
Marx’s prophetic argument, I shall try to describe its main ideas in
the form of a very brief outline.
Marx believes that capitalist competition forces the capitalist’s
hand. It forces the capitalist to accumulate capital. By doing so, he
works against his own long-term economic interests (since the
accumulation of capital is liable to bring about a fall of his profits).
But although working against his own personal interest, he works
in the interest of the historical development; he works, unwittingly,
for economic progress, and for socialism. This is due to the fact
that accumulation of capital means (a) increased productivity;
increase of wealth; and concentration of wealth in a few hands; (b)
increase of pauperism and misery; the workers are kept on
subsistence or starvation wages, mainly by the fact that the surplus
of workers, called the ‘industrial reserve army’, keeps the wages
on the lowest possible level. The trade cycle prevents, for any
length of time, the absorption of the surplus of workers by the
growing industry. This cannot be altered by the capitalists, even if
they wish to do so; for the falling rate of their profits makes their
own economic position much too precarious for any effective
action. In this way, capitalist accumulation turns out to be a

suicidal and self-contradictory process, even though it fosters the
technical, economic and historical progress towards socialism.
I
The premises of the first step are the laws of capitalist
competition, and of the accumulation of the means of production.
The conclusion is the law of increasing wealth and misery. I begin
my discussion with an explanation of these premises and
conclusions.
Under capitalism, competition between the capitalists plays an
important role. ‘The battle of competition’, as analysed by Marx in
Capital3, is carried out by selling the commodities produced, if
possible at a lower price than the competitor could afford to accept.
‘But the cheapness of a commodity’, Marx explains, ‘depends in
its turn, other things being equal, upon the productivity of labour;
and this, again, depends on the scale of production.’ For
production on a very large scale is in general capable of employing
more specialized machinery, and a greater quantity of it; this
increases the productivity of the workers, and permits the capitalist
to produce, and to sell, at a lower price. ‘Large capitalists,
therefore, get the better of small ones ... Competition always ends
with the downfall of many lesser capitalists and with the transition
of their capital into the hands of the conqueror.’ (This movement
is, as Marx points out, much accelerated by the credit system.)
According to Marx’s analysis, the process described,
accumulation due to competition, has two different aspects. One of
them is that the capitalist is forced to accumulate or concentrate
more and more capital, in order to survive; this means in practice
investing more and more capital in more and more as well as
newer and newer machinery, thus continually increasing the
productivity of his workers. The other aspect of the accumulation
of capital is the concentration of more and more wealth in the
hands of the various capitalists, and of the capitalist class; and
along with it goes the reduction in the number of capitalists, a
movement called by Marx the centralization4 of capital (in
contradistinction to mere accumulation or concentration).
Now three of these terms, competition, accumulation, and
increasing productivity, indicate the fundamental tendencies of all
capitalist production, according to Marx; they are the tendencies to
which I alluded when I described the premise of the first step as
‘the laws of capitalist competition and of accumulation’. The

fourth and the fifth terms, however, concentration and
centralization, indicate a tendency which forms one part of the
conclusion of the first step; for they describe a tendency towards a
continuous increase of wealth, and its centralization in fewer and
fewer hands. The other part of the conclusion, however, the law of
increasing misery, is only reached by a much more complicated
argument. But before beginning an explanation of this argument, I
must first explain this second conclusion itself.
The term ‘increasing misery’ may mean, as used by Marx, two
different things. It may be used in order to describe the extent of
misery, indicating that it is spread over an increasing number of
people; or it may be used in order to indicate an increase in the
intensity of the suffering of the people. Marx undoubtedly believed
that misery was growing both in extent and in intensity. This,
however, is more than he needed in order to carry his point. For the
purpose of the prophetic argument, a wider interpretation of the
term ‘increasing misery’ would do just as well (if not better5); an
interpretation, namely, according to which the extent of misery
increases, while its intensity may or may not increase, but at any
rate does not show any marked decrease.
But there is a further and much more important comment to be
made. Increasing misery, to Marx, involves fundamentally an
increasing exploitation of the employed workers; not only in
numbers but also in intensity. It must be admitted that in addition it
involves an increase in the suffering as well as in the numbers of
the unemployed, called6 by Marx the (relative) ‘surplus
population’ or the ‘industrial reserve army’. But the function of the
unemployed, in this process, is to exert pressure upon the
employed workers, thus assisting the capitalists in their efforts to
make profit out of the employed workers, to exploit them. ‘The
industrial reserve army’, Marx writes7, ‘belongs to capitalism just
as if its members had been reared by the capitalists at their own
cost. For its own varying needs, capital creates an ever-ready
supply of exploitable human material ... During periods of
depression and of semi-prosperity, the industrial reserve army
keeps up its pressure upon the ranks of the employed workers; and
during periods of excessive production and boom, it serves to
bridle their aspirations.’ Increasing misery, according to Marx, is
essentially the increasing exploitation of labour power; and since
labour power of the unemployed is not exploited, they can serve in
this process only as unpaid assistants of the capitalists in the

exploitation of the employed workers. The point is important since
later Marxists have often referred to unemployment as one of the
empirical facts that verify the prophecy that misery tends to
increase; but unemployment can be claimed to corroborate Marx’s
theory only if it occurs together with increased exploitation of the
employed workers, i.e. with long hours of work and with low real
wages.
This may suffice to explain the term ‘increasing misery’. But it
is still necessary to explain the law of increasing misery which
Marx claimed to have discovered. By this I mean the doctrine of
Marx on which the whole prophetic argument hinges; namely, the
doctrine that capitalism cannot possibly afford to decrease the
misery of the workers, since the mechanism of capitalist
accumulation keeps the capitalist under a strong economic pressure
which he is forced to pass on to the workers if he is not to
succumb. This is why the capitalists cannot compromise, why they
cannot meet any important demand of the workers, even if they
wished to do so; this is why ‘capitalism cannot be reformed but can
only be destroyed’8. It is clear that this law is the decisive
conclusion of the first step. The other conclusion, the law of
increasing wealth, would be a harmless matter, if only it were
possible for the increase of wealth to be shared by the workers.
Marx’s contention that this is impossible will therefore be the main
subject of our critical analysis. But before proceeding to a
presentation and criticism of Marx’s arguments in favour of this
contention, I may briefly comment on the first part of the
conclusion, the theory of increasing wealth.
The tendency towards the accumulation and concentration of
wealth, which Marx observed, can hardly be questioned. His
theory of increasing productivity is also, in the main,
unexceptionable. Although there may be limits to the beneficial
effects exerted by the growth of an enterprise upon its productivity,
there are hardly any limits to the beneficial effects of the
improvement and accumulation of machinery. But in regard to the
tendency towards the centralization of capital in fewer and fewer
hands, matters are not quite so simple. Undoubtedly, there is a
tendency in that direction, and we may grant that under an
unrestrained capitalist system there are few counteracting forces.
Not much can be said against this part of Marx’s analysis as a
description of an unrestrained capitalism. But considered as a
prophecy, it is less tenable. For we know that now there are many

means by which legislation can intervene. Taxation and death
duties can be used most effectively to counteract centralization,
and they have been so used. And anti-trust legislation can also be
used, although perhaps with less effect. To evaluate the force of
Marx’s prophetic argument we must consider the possibility of
great improvements in this direction; and as in previous chapters, I
must declare that the argument on which Marx bases this prophecy
of centralization or of a decrease in the number of capitalists is
inconclusive.
Having explained the main premises and conclusions of the
first step, and having disposed of the first conclusion, we can now
concentrate our attention entirely upon Marx’s derivation of the
other conclusion, the prophetic law of increasing misery. Three
different trends of thought may be distinguished in his attempts to
establish this prophecy. They will be dealt with in the next four
sections of this chapter under the headings: II: the theory of value;
III: the effect of the surplus population upon wages; Iv: the trade
cycle; v: the effects of the falling rate of profit.
II
Marx’s theory of value, usually considered by Marxists as well
as by anti-Marxists as a corner-stone of the Marxist creed, is in my
opinion one of its rather unimportant parts; indeed, the sole reason
why I am going to treat of it, instead of proceeding at once to the
next section, is that it is generally held to be important, and that I
cannot defend my reasons for differing from this opinion without
discussing the theory. But I wish to make it clear at once that in
holding that the theory of value is a redundant part of Marxism, I
am defending Marx rather than attacking him. For there is little
doubt that the many critics who have shown that the theory of
value is very weak in itself are in the main perfectly right. But even
if they were wrong, it would only strengthen the position of
Marxism if it could be established that its decisive historicopolitical doctrines can be developed entirely independently of such
a controversial theory. The idea of the so-called labour theory of
value9, adapted by Marx for his purposes from suggestions he
found in his predecessors (he refers especially to Adam Smith and
David Ricardo), is simple enough. If you need a carpenter, you
must pay him by the hour. If you ask him why a certain job is more
expensive than another one, he will point out that there is more
work in it. In addition to the labour, you must pay of course for the

timber. But if you go into this a little more closely, then you find
that you are, indirectly, paying for the labour involved in foresting,
felling, transporting, sawing, etc. This consideration suggests the
general theory that you have to pay for the job, or for any
commodity you may buy, roughly in proportion to the amount of
work in it, i.e. to the number of labour hours necessary for its
production.
I say ‘roughly’ because the actual prices fluctuate. But there is,
or so at least it appears, always something more stable behind these
prices, a kind of average price about which the actual prices
oscillate10, christened the ‘exchange-value’ or, briefly, the ‘value’
of the thing. Using this general idea, Marx defined the value of a
commodity as the average number of labour hours necessary for its
production (or for its reproduction).
The next idea, that of the theory of surplus value, is nearly as
simple. It too was adapted by Marx from his predecessors. (Engels
asserts11—perhaps mistakenly, but I shall follow his presentation
of the matter—that Marx’s main source was Ricardo.) The theory
of surplus value is an attempt, within the limits of the labour theory
of value, to answer the question: ‘How does the capitalist make his
profit?’ If we assume that the commodities produced in his factory
are sold on the market at their true value, i.e. according to the
number of labour hours necessary for their production, then the
only way in which the capitalist can make a profit is by paying his
workers less than the full value of their product. Thus the wages
received by the worker represent a value which is not equal to the
number of hours he has worked. And we can accordingly divide
his working day into two parts, the hours he has spent in producing
value equivalent to his wages and the hours he has spent in
producing value for the capitalist12. And correspondingly, we can
divide the whole value produced by the worker into two parts, the
value equal to his wages, and the rest, which is called surplus
value. This surplus value is appropriated by the capitalist and is the
sole basis for his profit.
So far, the story is simple enough. But now there arises a
theoretical difficulty. The whole value theory has been introduced
in order to explain the actual prices at which all commodities are
exchanged; and it is still assumed that the capitalist is able to
obtain on the market the full value of his product, i.e. a price that
corresponds to the total number of hours spent on it. But it looks as
if the worker does not get the full price of the commodity which he

sells to the capitalist on the labour market. It looks as if he is
cheated, or robbed; at any rate, as if he is not paid according to the
general law assumed by the value theory, namely, that all actual
prices paid are, at least in a first approximation, determined by the
value of the commodity. (Engels says that the problem was
realized by the economists who belonged to what Marx called ‘the
school of Ricardo’; and he asserts13 that their inability to solve it
led to the breakdown of this school.) There appeared what seemed
a rather obvious solution of the difficulty. The capitalist possesses
a monopoly of the means of production, and this superior
economic power can be used for bullying the worker into an
agreement which violates the law of value. But this solution
(which I consider quite a plausible description of the situation)
utterly destroys the labour theory of value. For it now turns out that
certain prices, namely, wages, do not correspond to their values,
not even in a first approximation. And this opens up the possibility
that this may be true of other prices for similar reasons.
Such was the situation when Marx entered the scene in order to
save the labour theory of value from destruction. With the help of
another simple but brilliant idea he succeeded in showing that the
theory of surplus value was not only compatible with the labour
theory of value but that it could also be rigidly deduced from the
latter. In order to achieve this deduction, we have only to ask
ourselves: what is, precisely, the commodity which the worker
sells to the capitalist? Marx ‘s reply is: not his labour hours, but his
whole labour power. What the capitalist buys or hires on the labour
market is the labour power of the worker. Let us assume,
tentatively, that this commodity is sold at its true value. What is its
value? According to the definition of value, the value of labour
power is the average number of labour hours necessary for its
production or reproduction. But this is, clearly, nothing but the
number of hours necessary for producing the worker’s (and his
family’s) means of subsistence.
Marx thus arrived at the following result. The true value of the
worker’s whole labour power is equal to the labour hours needed
for producing the means of his subsistence. Labour power is sold
for this price to the capitalist. If the worker is able to work longer
than that, then his surplus labour belongs to the buyer or hirer of
his power. The greater the productivity of labour, that is to say, the
more a worker can produce per hour, the fewer hours will be
needed for the production of his subsistence, and the more hours

remain for his exploitation This shows that the basis of capitalist
exploitation is a high productivity of labour. If the worker could
produce in a day no more than his own daily needs, then
exploitation would be impossible without violating the law of
value; it would be possible only by means of cheating, robbery, or
murder. But once the productivity of labour has, by the
introduction of machinery, risen so high that one man can produce
much more than he needs, capitalist exploitation becomes possible.
It is possible even in a capitalist society which is ‘ideal’ in the
sense that every commodity, including labour power, is bought and
sold at its true value. In such a society, the injustice of exploitation
docs not lie in the fact that the worker is not paid a ‘just price’ for
his labour power, but rather in the fact that he is so poor that he is
forced to sell his labour power, while the capitalist is rich enough
to buy labour power in great quantities, and to make profit out of
it.
By this derivation14 of the theory of surplus value, Marx saved
the labour theory of value from destruction for the time being; and
in spite of the fact that I regard the whole ‘value problem’ (in the
sense of an ‘objective’ true value round which the prices oscillate)
as irrelevant, I am very ready to admit that this was a theoretical
success of the first order. But Marx had done more than save a
theory originally advanced by ‘bourgeois economists’. With one
stroke, he gave a theory of exploitation and a theory explaining
why the workers’ wages tend to oscillate about the subsistence (or
starvation) level. But the greatest success was that he could now
give an explanation, one in keeping with his economic theory of
the legal system, of the fact that the capitalist mode of production
tended to adopt the legal cloak of liberalism. For the new theory
led him to the conclusion that once the introduction of new
machinery had multiplied the productivity of labour, there arose
the possibility of a new form of exploitation which used a free
market instead of brutal force, and which was based on the
‘formal’ observance of justice, equality before the law, and
freedom. The capitalist system, he asserted, was not only a system
of ‘free competition’, but it was also ‘maintained by the
exploitation of the labour of others, but of labour which, in a
formal sense, is free’15.
It is impossible for me to enter here into a detailed account of
the really astonishing number of further applications made by
Marx of his value theory. But it is also unnecessary, since my

criticism of the theory will show the way in which the value theory
can be eliminated from all these investigations. I am now going to
develop this criticism; its three main points are (a) that Marx’s
value theory does not suffice to explain exploitation, (b) that the
additional assumptions which are necessary for such an
explanation turn out to be sufficient, so that the theory of value
turns out to be redundant, (c) that Marx’s theory of value is an
essentialist or metaphysical one.
(a) The fundamental law of the theory of value is the law that
the prices of practically all commodities, including wages, are
determined by their values, or more precisely, that they are at least
in a first approximation proportional to the labour hours necessary
for their production. Now this ‘law of value’, as I may call it, at
once raises a problem. Why does it hold? Obviously, neither the
buyer nor the seller of the commodity can see, at a glance, how
many hours are necessary for its production; and even if they
could, it would not explain the law of value. For it is clear that the
buyer simply buys as cheaply as he can, and that the seller charges
as much as he can get. This, it appears, must be one of the
fundamental assumptions of any theory of market prices. In order
to explain the law of value, it would be our task to show why the
buyer is unlikely to succeed in buying below, and the seller in
selling above, the ‘value’ of a commodity. This problem was seen
more or less clearly by those who believed in the labour theory of
value, and their reply was this. For the purpose of simplification,
and in order to obtain a first approximation, let us assume perfectly
free competition, and for the same reason let us consider only such
commodities as can be manufactured in practically unlimited
quantities (if only the labour were available). Now let us assume
that the price of such a commodity is above its value; this would
mean that excessive profits can be made in this particular branch of
production. It would encourage various manufacturers to produce
this commodity, and competition would lower the price. The
opposite process would lead to an increase in the price of a
commodity which is sold below its value. Thus there will be
oscillations of price, and these will tend to centre about the values
of commodities. In other words, it is a mechanism of supply and
demand which, under free competition, tends to give force16 to the
law of value.
Such considerations as these can be found frequently in Marx,
for instance, in the third volume of Capital17, where he tries to

explain why there is a tendency for all profits in the various
branches of manufacture to approximate, and adjust themselves to
a certain average profit. And they are also used in the first volume,
especially in order to show why wages are kept low, near
subsistence level, or, what amounts to the same, just above
starvation level. It is clear that with wages below this level, the
workers would actually starve, and the supply of labour power on
the labour market would disappear. But as long as men live, they
will reproduce; and Marx attempts to show in detail (as we shall
see in section IV), why the mechanism of capitalist accumulation
must create a surplus population, an industrial reserve army. Thus
as long as wages are just above starvation level there will always
be not only a sufficient but even an excessive supply of labour
power on the labour market; and it is this excessive supply which,
according to Marx, prevents the rise of wages18: ‘The industrial
reserve army keeps up its pressure upon the ranks of the employed
workers; .. thus surplus population is the background in front of
which there operates the law of supply and demand of labour.
Surplus population restricts the range within which this law is
permitted to operate to such limits as best suit the capitalist greed
for exploitation and domination.’
(b) Now this passage shows that Marx himself realized the
necessity of backing up the law of value by a more concrete
theory; a theory which shows, in any particular case, how the laws
of supply and demand bring about the effect which has to be
explained; for instance, starvation wages. But if these laws are
sufficient to explain these effects, then we do not need the labour
theory of value at all, whether or not it may be tenable as a first
approximation (which I do not think it is). Furthermore, as Marx
realized, the laws of supply and demand are necessary for
explaining all those cases in which there is no free competition,
and in which his law of value is therefore clearly out of operation;
for instance, where a monopoly can be used to keep prices
constantly above their ‘values’. Marx considered such cases as
exceptions, which is hardly the right view; but however this may
be, the case of monopolies shows not only that the laws of supply
and demand are necessary to supplement his law of value, but also
that they are more generally applicable.
On the other hand, it is clear that the laws of supply and
demand are not only necessary but also sufficient to explain all the
phenomena of ‘exploitation’ which Marx observed—the

phenomena, more precisely, of the misery of the workers side by
side with the wealth of the entrepreneurs—if we assume, as Marx
did, a free labour market as well as a chronically excessive supply
of labour. (Marx’s theory of this excessive supply will be
discussed more fully in section IV below.) As Marx shows, it is
clear enough that the workers will be forced, under such
circumstances, to work long hours at low wages, in other words, to
permit the capitalist to ‘appropriate the best part of the fruits of
their labour’. And in this trivial argument, which is part of Marx’s
own, there is no need even to mention ‘value’.
Thus the value theory turns out to be a completely redundant
part of Marx’s theory of exploitation; and this holds independently
of the question whether or not the value theory is true. But the part
of Marx’s theory of exploitation which remains after the value
theory is eliminated is undoubtedly correct, provided we accept the
doctrine of surplus population. It is unquestionably true that (in the
absence of a redistribution of wealth through the state) the
existence of a surplus population must lead to starvation wages,
and to provocative differences in the standard of living.
(What is not so clear, and not explained by Marx either, is why
the supply of labour should continue to exceed the demand. For if
it is so profitable to ‘exploit’ labour, how is it, then, that the
capitalists are not forced, by competition, to try to raise their
profits by employing more labour? In other words, why do they not
compete against each other on the labour market, thereby raising
the wages to the point where they begin to become no longer
sufficiently profitable, so that it is no longer possible to speak of
exploitation? Marx would have answered—see section V, below—
’ Because competition forces them to invest more and more capital
in machinery, so that they cannot increase that part of their capital
which they use for wages’. But this answer is unsatisfactory since
even if they spend their capital on machinery, they can do so only
by buying labour to build machinery, or by causing others to buy
such labour, thus increasing the demand for labour. It appears, for
such reasons, that the phenomena of ‘exploitation’ which Marx
observed were due, not, as he believed, to the mechanism of a
perfectly competitive market, but to other factors—especially to a
mixture of low productivity and imperfectly competitive markets.
But a detailed and satisfactory explanation19 of the phenomena
appears still to be missing.)

(c) Before leaving this discussion of the value theory and the
part played by it in Marx’s analysis, I wish to comment briefly
upon another of its aspects. The whole idea—which was not
Marx’s invention—that there is something behind the prices, an
objective or real or true value of which prices are only a ‘form of
appearance’20, shows clearly enough the influence of Platonic
Idealism with its distinction between a hidden essential or true
reality, and an accidental or delusive appearance. Marx, it must be
said, made a great effort21 to destroy this mystical character of
objective ‘value’, but he did not succeed. He tried to be realistic, to
accept only something observable and important—labour hours—
as the reality which appears in the form of price; and it cannot be
questioned that the number of labour hours necessary for
producing a commodity, i.e. its Marxian ‘value’, is an important
thing. And in a way, it surely is a purely verbal problem whether or
not we should call these labour hours the ‘value’ of the
commodity. But such a terminology may become most misleading
and strangely unrealistic, especially if we assume with Marx that
the productivity of labour increases. For it has been pointed out by
Marx himself22 that, with increasing productivity, the value of all
commodities decreases, and that an increase is therefore possible in
real wages as well as real profits, i.e. in the commodities consumed
by workers and by capitalists respectively, together with a decrease
in the ‘value’ of wages and of profits, i.e. in the hours spent on
them. Thus wherever we find real progress, such as shorter
working hours and a greatly improved standard of living of the
workers (quite apart from a higher income in money23, even if
calculated in gold), then the workers could at the same time bitterly
complain that the Marxian ‘value’, the real essence or substance of
their income, is dwindling away, since the labour hours necessary
for its production have been reduced. (An analogous complaint
might be made by the capitalists.) All this is admitted by Marx
himself; and it shows how misleading the value terminology must
be, and how little it represents the real social experience of the
workers. In the labour theory of value, the Platonic ‘essence’ has
become entirely divorced from experience24 ...
III
After eliminating Marx’s labour theory of value and his theory
of surplus value, we can, of course, still retain his analysis (see the
end of (a) in section II) of the pressure exerted by the surplus

population upon the wages of the employed workers. It cannot be
denied that, if there is a free labour market and a surplus
population, i.e. widespread and chronic unemployment (and there
can be no doubt that unemployment played its role in Marx’s time
and ever since), then wages cannot rise above starvation wages;
and under the same assumption, together with the doctrine of
accumulation developed above, Marx, although not justified in
proclaiming a law of increasing misery, was right in asserting that,
in a world of high profits and increasing wealth, starvation wages
and a life of misery might be the permanent lot of the workers.
I think that, even if Marx’s analysis was defective, his effort to
explain the phenomenon of ‘exploitation’ deserves the greatest
respect. (As mentioned at the end of (b) in the foregoing section,
no really satisfactory theory seems to exist even now.) It must be
said, of course, that Marx was wrong when he prophesied that the
conditions which he observed were to be permanent if not changed
by a revolution, and even more when he prophesied that they
would get worse. The facts have refuted these prophecies.
Moreover, even if we could admit the validity of his analysis for an
unrestrained, a non-interventionist system, even then would his
prophetic argument be inconclusive. For the tendency towards
increasing misery operates, according to Marx’s own analysis, only
under a system in which the labour market is free—in a perfectly
unrestrained capitalism. But once we admit the possibility of trade
unions, of collective bargaining, of strikes, then the assumptions of
the analysis are no longer applicable, and the whole prophetic
argument breaks down. According to Marx’s own analysis, we
should have to expect that such a development would either be
suppressed, or that it would be equivalent to a social revolution.
For collective bargaining can oppose capital by establishing a kind
of monopoly of labour; it can prevent the capitalist from using the
industrial reserve army for the purpose of keeping wages down;
and in this way it can force the capitalists to content themselves
with lower profits. We see here why the cry ‘Workers, unite!’ was,
from a Marxian point of view, indeed the only possible reply to an
unrestrained capitalism.
But we see, too, why this cry must open up the whole problem
of state interference, and why it is likely to lead to the end of the
unrestrained system, and to a new system, interventionism25, which
may develop in very different directions. For it is almost inevitable
that the capitalists will contest the workers’ right to unite,

maintaining that unions must endanger the freedom of competition
on the labour market. Non-interventionism thus faces the problem
(it is part of the paradox of freedom26): Which freedom should the
state protect? The freedom of the labour market, or the freedom of
the poor to unite? Whichever decision is taken, it leads to state
intervention, to the use of organized political power, of the state as
well as of unions, in the field of economic conditions. It leads,
under all circumstances, to an extension of the economic
responsibility of the state, whether or not this responsibility is
consciously accepted. And this means that the assumptions on
which Marx’s analysis is based must disappear.
The derivation of the historical law of increasing misery is thus
invalid. All that remains is a moving description of the misery of
the workers which prevailed a hundred years ago, and a valiant
attempt to explain it with the help of what we may call, with
Lenin27, Marx’s ‘economic law of the movement of contemporary
society’ (that is, of the unrestrained capitalism of a hundred years
ago). But in so far as it is meant as an historical prophecy, and in
so far as it is used to deduce the ‘inevitability’ of certain historical
developments, the derivation is invalid.
IV
The significance of Marx’s analysis rests very largely upon the
fact that a surplus population actually existed at his time, and down
to our own day (a fact which has hardly received a really
satisfactory explanation yet, as I said before). So far, however, we
have not yet discussed Marx’s argument in support of his
contention that it is the mechanism of capitalist production itself
that always produces the surplus population which it needs for
keeping down the wages of the employed workers. But this theory
is not only ingenious and interesting in itself; it contains at the
same time Marx’s theory of the trade cycle and of general
depressions, a theory which clearly bears upon the prophecy of the
crash of the capitalist system because of the intolerable misery
which it must produce. In order to make as strong a case for
Marx’s theory as I can, I have altered it slightly28 (namely, by
introducing a distinction between two kinds of machinery, the one
for the mere extension, and the other for the intensification, of
production). But this alteration need not arouse the suspicion of
Marxist readers; for I am not going to criticize the theory at all.

The amended theory of surplus population and of the trade
cycle may be outlined as follows. The accumulation of capital
means that the capitalist spends part of his profits on new
machinery; this may also be expressed by saying that only a part of
his real profits consists in goods for consumption, while part of it
consists in machines. These machines, in turn, may be intended
either for the expansion of industry, for new factories, etc., or they
may be intended for intensifying production by increasing the
productivity of labour in the existing industries. The former kind of
machinery makes possible an increase of employment, the latter
kind has the effect of making workers superfluous, of ‘setting the
workers at liberty’ as this process was called in Marx’s day.
(Nowadays it is sometimes called ‘technological unemployment’.)
Now the mechanism of capitalist production, as envisaged by the
amended Marxist theory of the trade cycle, works roughly like this.
If we assume, to start with, that for some reason or other there is a
general expansion of industry, then a part of the industrial reserve
army will be absorbed, the pressure upon the labour market will be
relieved, and wages will show a tendency to rise. A period of
prosperity begins. But the moment wages rise, certain mechanical
improvements which intensify production and which were
previously unprofitable because of the low wages may become
profitable (even though the cost of such machinery will begin to
rise). Thus more machinery will be produced of the kind that ‘sets
the workers at liberty’. As long as these machines are only in the
process of being produced, prosperity continues, or increases. But
once the new machines are themselves beginning to produce, the
picture changes. (This change is, according to Marx, accentuated
by a fall in the rate of profit, to be discussed under (V), below.)
Workers will be ‘set at liberty’, i.e. condemned to starvation. But
the disappearance of many consumers must lead to a collapse of
the home market. In consequence, great numbers of machines in
the expanded factories become idle (the less efficient machinery
first), and this leads to a further increase of unemployment and a
further collapse of the market. The fact that much machinery now
lies idle means that much capital has become worthless, that many
capitalists cannot fulfil their obligations; thus a financial crisis
develops, leading to complete stagnation in the production of
capital goods, etc. But while the depression (or, as Marx calls it,
the ‘crisis’) takes its course, the conditions are ripening for a
recovery. These conditions mainly consist in the growth of the

industrial reserve army and the consequent readiness of the
workers to accept starvation wages. At very low wages production
becomes profitable even at the low prices of a depressed market;
and once production starts, the capitalist begins again to
accumulate, to buy machinery. Since wages are very low, he will
find that it is not yet profitable to use new machinery (perhaps
invented in the meanwhile) of the type which sets the workers at
liberty. At first he will rather buy machinery with the plan of
extending production. This leads slowly to an extension of
employment and to a recovery of the home market. Prosperity is
coming once again. Thus we are back at our starting point. The
cycle is closed, and the process can start once more.
This is the amended Marxist theory of unemployment and of
the trade cycle. As I have promised, I am not going to criticize it.
The theory of trade cycles is a very difficult affair, and we
certainly do not yet know enough about it (at least I don’t). It is
very likely that the theory outlined is incomplete, and, especially,
that such aspects as the existence of a monetary system based
partly upon credit creation, and the effects of hoarding, are not
sufficiently taken into account. But however this may be, the trade
cycle is a fact which cannot easily be argued away, and it is one of
the greatest of Marx’s merits to have emphasized its significance
as a social problem. But although all this must be admitted, we
may criticize the prophecy which Marx attempts to base upon his
theory of the trade cycle. First of all, he asserts that depressions
will become increasingly worse, not only in their scope but also in
the intensity of the workers’ suffering. But he gives no argument to
support this (apart, perhaps, from the theory of the fall in the rate
of profit, which will be discussed presently). And if we look at
actual developments, then we must say that terrible as are the
effects and especially the psychological effects of unemployment
even in those countries where the workers are now insured against
it, there is no doubt that the workers’ sufferings were incomparably
worse in Marx’s day. But this is not my main point.
In Marx’s day, nobody ever thought of that technique of state
intervention which is now called ‘counter cycle policy’; and,
indeed, such a thought must be utterly foreign to an unrestrained
capitalist system. (But even before Marx’s time, we find the
beginning of doubts about, and even of investigations into, the
wisdom of the credit policy of the Bank of England during a
depression29.) Unemployment insurance, however, means

intervention, and therefore an increase in the responsibility of the
state, and it is likely to lead to experiments in counter cycle policy.
I do not maintain that these experiments must necessarily be
successful (although I do believe that the problem may in the end
prove not so very difficult, and that Sweden30, in particular, has
already shown what can be done in this field). But I wish to assert
most emphatically that the belief that it is impossible to abolish
unemployment by piecemeal measures is on the same plane of
dogmatism as the numerous physical proofs (proffered by men
who lived even later than Marx) that the problems of aviation
would always remain insoluble. When the Marxists say, as they
sometimes do; that Marx has proved the uselessness of a counter
cycle policy and of similar piecemeal measures, then they simply
do not speak the truth; Marx investigated an unrestrained
capitalism, and he never dreamt of interventionism. He therefore
never investigated the possibility of a systematic interference with
the trade cycle, much less did he offer a proof of its impossibility.
It is strange to find that the same people who complain of the
irresponsibility of the capitalists in the face of human suffering are
irresponsible enough to oppose, with dogmatic assertions of this
kind, experiments from which we may learn how to relieve human
suffering (how to become masters of our social environment, as
Marx would have said), and how to control some of the unwanted
social repercussions of our actions. But the apologists of Marxism
are quite unaware of the fact that in the name of their own vested
interests they are fighting against progress; they do not see that it is
the danger of any movement like Marxism that it soon comes to
represent all kinds of vested interests, and that there are intellectual
investments, as well as material ones. Another point must be stated
here. Marx, as we have seen, believed that unemployment was
fundamentally a gadget of the capitalist mechanism with the
function of keeping wages low, and of making the exploitation of
the employed workers easier; increasing misery always involved
for him increasing misery of the employed workers too; and this is
just the whole point of the plot. But even if we assume that this
view was justified in his day, as a prophecy it has been definitely
refuted by later experience. The standard of living of employed
workers has risen everywhere since Marx’s day; and (as Parkes31
has emphasized in his criticism of Marx) the real wages of
employed workers tend even to increase during a depression (they
did so, for example, during the last great depression), owing to a

more rapid fall in prices than in wages. This is a glaring refutation
of Marx, especially since it proves that the main burden of
unemployment insurance was borne not by the workers, but by the
entrepreneurs, who therefore lost directly through unemployment,
instead of profiting indirectly, as in Marx’s scheme.
V
None of the Marxist theories so far discussed do even seriously
attempt to prove the point which is the most decisive one within
the first step; namely, that accumulation keeps the capitalist under
a strong economic pressure which he is forced, on pain of his own
destruction, to pass on to the workers; so that capitalism can only
be destroyed, but not reformed. An attempt to prove this point is
contained in that theory of Marx’s which aims at establishing the
law that the rate of profit tends to fall.
What Marx calls the rate of profit corresponds to the rate of
interest; it is the percentage of the yearly average of capitalist
profit over the whole invested capital. This rate, Marx says, tends
to fall owing to the rapid growth of capital investments; for these
must accumulate more quickly than profits can rise.
The argument by which Marx attempts to prove this is again
rather ingenious. Capitalist competition, as we have seen, forces
the capitalists to make investments that increase the productivity of
labour. Marx even admitted that by this increase in productivity
they render a great service to mankind32: ‘It is one of the civilizing
aspects of capitalism that it exacts surplus value in a manner and
under circumstances which are more favourable than previous
forms (such as slavery, serfdom, etc.) to the development of the
productive powers, as well as to the social conditions for a
reconstruction of society on a higher plane. For this, it even creates
the elements; .. for the quantity of useful commodities produced in
any given span of time depends upon the productivity of labour.’
But this service to mankind is not only rendered without any
intention by the capitalists; the action to which they are forced by
competition also runs counter to their own interests, for the
following reason.
The capital of any industrialist can be divided into two parts.
One is invested in land, machinery, raw materials, etc. The other is
used for wages. Marx calls the first part ‘constant capital’ and the
second ‘variable capital’; but since I consider this terminology
rather misleading, I shall call the two parts ‘immobilized capital’

and ‘wage capital’. The capitalist, according to Marx, can profit
only by exploiting the workers; in other words, by using his wage
capital. Immobilized capital is a kind of a dead weight which he is
forced by competition to carry on with, and even to increase
continually. This increase is not, however, accompanied by a
corresponding increase in his profits; only an extension of the
wage capital could have this wholesome effect. But the general
tendency towards an increase in productivity means that the
material part of capital increases relatively to its wage part.
Therefore, the total capital increases also, and without a
compensating increase in profits; that is to say, the rate of profit
must fall.
Now this argument has been often questioned; indeed, it was
attacked, by implication, long before Marx33. In spite of these
attacks, I believe that there may be something in Marx’s argument;
especially if we take it together with his theory of the trade cycle.
(I shall return to this point briefly in the next chapter.) But what I
wish to question here is the bearing of this argument upon the
theory of increasing misery.
Marx sees this connection as follows. If the rate of profit tends
to fall, then the capitalist is faced with destruction. All he can do is
to attempt to ‘take it out of the workers’, i.e. to increase
exploitation. This he can do by extending working hours; speeding
up work; lowering wages; raising the workers’ cost of living
(inflation); exploiting more women and children. The inner
contradictions of capitalism, based on the fact that competition and
profit-making are in conflict, develop here into a climax. First,
they force the capitalist to accumulate and to increase productivity,
and so reduce the rate of profit. Next, they force him to increase
exploitation to an intolerable degree, and with it the tension
between the classes. Thus compromise is impossible. The
contradictions cannot be removed. They must finally seal the fate
of capitalism.
This is the main argument. But can it be conclusive? We must
remember that increased productivity is the very basis of capitalist
exploitation; only if the worker can produce much more than he
needs for himself and his family can the capitalist appropriate
surplus labour. Increased productivity, in Marx’s terminology,
means increased surplus labour; it means both an increased number
of hours available to the capitalist, and on top of this, an increased
number of commodities produced per hour. It means, in other

words, a greatly increased profit. This is admitted by Marx34. He
does not hold that profits are dwindling; he only holds that the total
capital increases much more quickly than the profits, so that the
rate of profit falls.
But if this is so, there is no reason why the capitalist should
labour under an economic pressure which he is forced to pass on to
the workers, whether he likes it or not. It is true, probably, that he
does not like to see a fall in his rate of profit. But as long as his
income does not fall, but, on the contrary, rises, there is no real
danger. The situation for a successful average capitalist will be
this: he sees his income rise quickly, and his capital still more
quickly; that is to say, his savings rise more quickly than the part
of his income which he consumes. I do not think that this is a
situation which must force him to desperate measures, or which
makes a compromise with the workers impossible. On the
contrary, it seems to me quite tolerable.
It is true, of course, that the situation contains an element of
danger. Those capitalists who speculate on the assumption of a
constant or of a rising rate of profit may get into trouble; and
things such as these may indeed contribute to the trade cycle,
accentuating the depression. But this has little to do with the
sweeping consequences which Marx prophesied.
This concludes my analysis of the third and last argument,
propounded by Marx in order to prove the law of increasing
misery.
VI
In order to show how completely wrong Marx was in his
prophecies, and at the same time how justified he was in his
glowing protest against the hell of an unrestrained capitalism as
well as in his demand, ‘Workers, unite!’, I shall quote a few
passages from the chapter of Capital in which he discusses the
‘General Law of Capitalist Accumulation’35. ‘In factories .. young
male workers are used up in masses before they reach the age of
manhood; after that, only a very small proportion remains useful
for industry, so that they are constantly dismissed in large
numbers. They then form part of the floating surplus population
which grows with the growth of industry .. Labour power is so
quickly used up by capital that the middle-aged worker is usually a
worn-out man .. Dr. Lee, medical officer of health, declared not
long ago “that the average age at death of the Manchester upper

middle class was 38, while the average age at death of the
labouring class was 17; while at Liverpool those figures were
represented as 35 against 15 ..” .. The exploitation of working-class
children puts a premium upon their production ... The higher the
productivity of labour .. the more precarious become the worker’s
conditions of existence ... Within the capitalist system, all the
methods for raising the social productivity of labour .. are
transformed into means of domination and of exploitation; they
mutilate the worker into a fragment of a human being, they
degrade him to a mere cog in the machine, they make work a
torture, .. and drag his wife and children beneath the wheels of the
capitalist Juggernaut .. It follows that to the degree in which capital
accumulates, the worker’s condition must deteriorate, whatever his
payment may be .. the greater the social wealth, the amount of
capital at work, the extent and energy of its growth, .. the larger is
the surplus population ... The size of the industrial reserve army
grows as the power of wealth grows. But .. the larger the industrial
reserve army, the larger are the masses of the workers whose
misery is relieved only by an increase in the agony of toil; and ..
the larger is the number of those who are officially recognized as
paupers. This is the absolute and general law of capitalist
accumulation ... The accumulation of wealth at the one pole of
society involves at the same time an accumulation of misery, of the
agony of toil, of slavery, ignorance, brutalization, and of moral
degradation, at the opposite pole ..’
Marx’s terrible picture of the economy of his time is only too
true. But his law that misery must increase together with
accumulation does not hold. Means of production have
accumulated and the productivity of labour has increased since his
day to an extent which even he would hardly have thought
possible. But child labour, working hours, the agony of toil, and
the precariousness of the worker’s existence, have not increased;
they have declined. I do not say that this process must continue.
There is no law of progress, and everything will depend on
ourselves. But the actual situation is briefly and fairly summed up
by Parkes36 in one sentence: ‘Low wages, long hours, and child
labour have been characteristic of capitalism not, as Marx
predicted, in its old age, but in its infancy.’
Unrestrained capitalism is gone. Since the day of Marx
democratic interventionism has made immense advances, and the
improved productivity of labour—a consequence of the

accumulation of capital—has made it possible virtually to stamp
out misery. This shows that much has been achieved, in spite of
undoubtedly grave mistakes, and it should encourage us to believe
that more can be done. For much remains to be done and to be
undone. Democratic interventionism can only make it possible. It
rests with us to do it.
I have no illusions concerning the force of my arguments.
Experience shows that Marx’s prophecies were false. But
experience can always be explained away. And, indeed, Marx
himself, and Engels, began with the elaboration of an auxiliary
hypothesis designed to explain why the law of increasing misery
does not work as they expected it to do. According to this
hypothesis, the tendency towards a falling rate of profit, and with
it, increasing misery, is counteracted by the effects of colonial
exploitation, or, as it is usually called, by ‘modern imperialism’.
Colonial exploitation, according to this theory, is a method of
passing on economic pressure to the colonial proletariat, a group
which, economically as well as politically, is weaker still than the
industrial proletariat at home. ‘Capital invested in colonies’, Marx
writes37, ‘may yield a higher rate of profit for the simple reason
that the rate of profit is higher there where capitalist development
is still in a backward stage, and for the added reason that slaves,
coolies, etc., permit a better exploitation of labour. I can see no
reason why these higher rates of profit .. , when sent home, should
not enter there as elements into the average rate of profit, and, in
proportion, contribute to keeping it up.’ (It is worth mentioning
that the main idea behind this theory of ‘modern’ imperialism can
be traced back for more than 160 years, to Adam Smith, who said
of colonial trade that it ‘has necessarily contributed to keep up the
rate of profit’.) Engels went one step further than Marx in his
development of the theory. Forced to admit that in Britain the
prevailing tendency was not towards an increase in misery but
rather towards a considerable improvement, he hints that this may
be clue to the fact that Britain ‘is exploiting the whole world’; and
he scornfully assails ‘the British working class’ which, instead of
suffering as he expected them to do, ‘is actually becoming more
and more bourgeois’. And he continues38: ‘It seems that this most
bourgeois of all nations wants to bring matters to such a pass as to
have a bourgeois aristocracy and a bourgeois proletariat side by
side with the bourgeoisie.’ Now this change of front on Engels’
part is at least as remarkable as that other one of his which I

mentioned in the last chapter39; and like that, it was made under the
influence of a social development which turned out to be one of
decreasing misery. Marx blamed capitalism for ‘proletarianizing
the middle class and the lower bourgeoisie’, and for reducing the
workers to pauperism. Engels now blames the system—it is still
blamed—for making bourgeois out of workers. But the nicest
touch in Engels’ complaint is the indignation that makes him call
the British who behave so inconsiderately as to falsify Marxist
prophecies ‘this most bourgeois of all nations’. According to
Marxist doctrine, we should expect from the ‘most bourgeois of all
nations’ a development of misery and class tension to an
intolerable degree; instead, we hear that the opposite takes place.
But the good Marxist’s hair rises when he hears of the incredible
wickedness of a capitalist system that transforms good proletarians
into bad bourgeois; quite forgetting that Marx showed that the
wickedness of the system consisted solely in the fact that it was
working the other way round. Thus we read in Lenin’s analysis40
of the evil causes and dreadful effects of modern British
imperialism: ‘Causes: (1) exploitation of the whole world by this
country; (2) its monopolistic position in the world market; (3) its
colonial monopoly. Effects: (1) bourgeoisification of a part of the
British proletariat; (2) a part of the proletariat permits itself to be
led by people who are bought by the bourgeoisie, or who are at
least paid by it.’ Having given such a pretty Marxist name, ‘the
bourgeoisification of the proletariat’, to a hateful tendency—
hateful mainly because it did not fit in with the way the world
should go according to Marx—Lenin apparently believes that it
has become a Marxist tendency. Marx himself held that the more
quickly the whole world could go through the necessary historical
period of capitalist industrialization, the better, and he was
therefore inclined to support41 imperialist developments. But Lenin
came to a very different conclusion. Since Britain’s possession of
colonies was the reason why the workers at home followed
‘leaders bought by the bourgeoisie’ instead of the Communists, he
saw in the colonial empire a potential trigger or fuse. A revolution
there would make the law of increasing misery operative at home,
and a revolution at home would follow. Thus the colonies were the
place from which the fire would spread ...
I do not believe that the auxiliary hypothesis whose history I
have sketched can save the law of increasing misery; for this
hypothesis is itself refuted by experience. There are countries, for

instance the Scandinavian democracies, Czechoslovakia, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, to say nothing of the United States, in
which a democratic interventionism secured to the workers a high
standard of living, in spite of the fact that colonial exploitation had
no influence there, or was at any rate far too unimportant to
support the hypothesis. Furthermore, if we compare certain
countries that ‘exploit’ colonies, like Holland and Belgium, with
Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Czechoslovakia which do not
‘exploit’ colonies, we do not find that the industrial workers
profited from the possession of colonies, for the situation of the
working classes in all those countries was strikingly similar.
Furthermore, although the misery imposed upon the natives
through colonization is one of the darkest chapters in the history of
civilization, it cannot be asserted that their misery has tended to
increase since the days of Marx. The exact opposite is the case;
things have greatly improved. And yet, increasing misery would
have to be very noticeable there if the auxiliary hypothesis and the
original theory were both correct.
VII
As I did with the second and third steps in the previous
chapters, I shall now illustrate the first step of Marx’s prophetic
argument by showing something of its practical influence upon the
tactics of Marxist parties.
The Social Democrats, under the pressure of obvious facts,
tacitly dropped the theory that the intensity of misery increases; but
their whole tactics remained based upon the assumption that the
law of the increasing extent of misery was valid, that is to say, that
the numerical strength of the industrial proletariat must continue to
increase. This is why they based their policy exclusively upon
representing the interests of the industrial workers, at the same
time firmly believing that they were representing, or would very
soon represent, ‘the great majority of the population’42. They never
doubted the assertion of the Manifesto that ‘All previous historical
movements were movements of minorities ... The proletarian
movement is the self-conscious, independent movement of the
immense majority, in the interest of the immense majority.’ They
waited confidently, therefore, for the day when the class
consciousness and class assuredness of the industrial workers
would win them the majority in the elections. There can be no
doubt as to who will be victorious in the end—the few exploiters,

or the immense majority, the workers.’ They did not see that the
industrial workers nowhere formed a majority, much less an
‘immense majority’, and that statistics no longer showed any
tendency towards an increase in their numbers. They did not
understand that the existence of a democratic workers’ party was
fully justified only as long as such a party was prepared to
compromise or even to co-operate with other parties, for instance
with some party representing the peasants, or the middle classes.
And they did not see that, if they wanted to rule the state solely as
the representatives of the majority of the population, they would
have to change their whole policy and cease to represent mainly or
exclusively the industrial workers. Of course, it is no substitute for
this change of policy to assert naively that the proletarian policy as
such may simply bring (as Marx said43) ‘the rural producers under
the intellectual leadership of the central towns of their districts,
there securing to them, in the industrial worker, the natural trustee
of their interests ...’
The position of the Communist parties was different. They
strictly adhered to the theory of increasing misery, believing in an
increase not only of its extent but also of its intensity, once the
causes of the temporary bourgeoisification of the workers were
removed. This belief contributed considerably to what Marx would
have called ‘the inner contradictions’ of their policy.
The tactical situation seems simple enough. Thanks to Marx’s
prophecy, the Communists knew for certain that misery must soon
increase. They also knew that the party could not win the
confidence of the workers without fighting for them, and with
them, for an improvement of their lot. These two fundamental
assumptions clearly determined the principles of their general
tactics. Make the workers demand their share, back them up in
every particular episode in their unceasing fight for bread and
shelter. Fight with them tenaciously for the fulfilment of their
practical demands, whether economic or political. Thus you will
win their confidence. At the same time, the workers will learn that
it is impossible for them to better their lot by these petty fights, and
that nothing short of a wholesale revolution can bring about an
improvement. For all these petty fights are bound to be
unsuccessful; we know from Marx that the capitalists simply
cannot continue to compromise and that, ultimately, misery must
increase. Accordingly, the only result—but a valuable one—of the
workers’ daily fight against their oppressors is an increase in their

class consciousness; it is that feeling of unity which can be won
only in battle, together with a desperate knowledge that only
revolution can help them in their misery. When this stage is
reached, then the hour has struck for the final show-down.
This is the theory and the Communists acted accordingly. At
first they support the workers in their fight to improve their lot.
But, contrary to all expectations and prophecies, the fight is
successful. The demands are granted. Obviously, the reason is that
they had been too modest. Therefore one must demand more. But
the demands are granted again44. And as misery decreases, the
workers become less embittered, more ready to bargain for wages
than to plot for revolution.
Now the Communists find that their policy must be reversed.
Something must be done to bring the law of increasing misery into
operation. For instance, colonial unrest must be stirred up (even
where there is no chance of a successful revolution), and with the
general purpose of counteracting the bourgeoisification of the
workers, a policy fomenting catastrophes of all sorts must be
adopted. But this new policy destroys the confidence of the
workers. The Communists lose their members, with the exception
of those who are inexperienced in real political fights. They lose
exactly those whom they describe as the ‘vanguard of the working
class’; their tacitly implied principle: ‘The worse things are, the
better they are, since misery must precipitate revolution’, makes
the workers suspicious—the better the application of this principle,
the worse are the suspicions entertained by the workers. For they
are realists; to obtain their confidence, one must work to improve
their lot.
Thus the policy must be reversed again: one is forced to fight
for the immediate betterment of the workers’ lot and to hope at the
same time for the opposite.
With this, the ‘inner contradictions’ of the theory produce the
last stage of confusion. It is the stage when it is hard to know who
is the traitor, since treachery may be faithfulness and faithfulness
treachery. It is the stage when those who followed the party not
simply because it appeared to them (rightly, I am afraid) as the
only vigorous movement with humanitarian ends, but especially
because it was a movement based on a scientific theory, must
either leave it, or sacrifice their intellectual integrity; for they must
now learn to believe blindly in some authority. Ultimately, they
must become mystics—hostile to reasonable argument.

It seems that it is not only capitalism which is labouring under
inner contradictions that threaten to bring about its downfall ...

Chapter 21: An Evaluation Of The Prophecy
The arguments underlying Marx’s historical prophecy are
invalid. His ingenious attempt to draw prophetic conclusions from
observations of contemporary economic tendencies failed. The
reason for this failure docs not lie in any insufficiency of the
empirical basis of the argument. Marx’s sociological and economic
analyses of contemporary society may have been somewhat onesided, but in spite of their bias, they were excellent in so far as they
were descriptive. The reason for his failure as a prophet lies
entirely in the poverty of historicism as such, in the simple fact that
even if we observe to-day what appears to be a historical tendency
or trend, we cannot know whether it will have the same appearance
to-morrow.
We must admit that Marx saw many things in the right light. If
we consider only his prophecy that the system of unrestrained
capitalism, as he knew it, was not going to last much longer, and
that its apologists who thought it would last forever were wrong,
then we must say that he was right. He was right, too, in holding
that it was largely the ‘class struggle’, i.e. the association of the
workers, that was going to bring about its transformation into a
new economic system. But we must not go so far as to say that
Marx predicted that new system, interventionism1, under another
name, socialism. The truth is that he had no inkling of what was
lying ahead. What he called ‘socialism’ was very dissimilar from
any form of interventionism, even from the Russian form; for he
strongly believed that the impending development would diminish
the influence, political as well as economic, of the state, while
interventionism has increased it everywhere.
Since I am criticizing Marx and, to some extent, praising
democratic piecemeal interventionism (especially of the
institutional kind explained in section VII to chapter 17), I wish to
make it clear that I feel much sympathy with Marx’s hope for a
decrease in state influence. It is undoubtedly the greatest danger of
interventionism—especially of any direct intervention—that it
leads to an increase in state power and in bureaucracy. Most
interventionists do not mind this, or they close their eyes to it,
which increases the danger. But I believe that once the danger is
faced squarely, it should be possible to master it. For this is again

merely a problem of social technology and of social piecemeal
engineering. But it is important to tackle it early, for it constitutes a
danger to democracy. We must plan for freedom, and not only for
security, if for no other reason than that only freedom can make
security secure.
But let us return to Marx’s prophecy. One of the historical
tendencies which he claimed to have discovered seems to be of a
more persistent character than the others; I mean the tendency
towards the accumulation of the means of production, and
especially towards increasing the productivity of labour. It seems
indeed that this tendency will continue for some time, provided, of
course, that we continue to keep civilization going. But Marx did
not merely recognize this tendency and its ‘civilizing aspects’, he
also saw its inherent dangers. More especially, he was one of the
first (although he had some predecessors, for instance; Fourier2) to
emphasize the connection between ‘the development of the
productive forces’ in which he saw3 ‘the historical mission and
justification of capital’, and that most destructive phenomenon of
the credit system—a system which seems to have encouraged the
rapid rise of industrialism—the trade cycle.
Marx’s own theory of the trade cycle (discussed in section IV
of the last chapter) may perhaps be paraphrased as follows: even if
it is true that the inherent laws of the free market produce a
tendency towards full employment, it is also true that every single
approach towards full employment, i.e. towards a shortage of
labour, stimulates inventors and investors to create and to
introduce new labour-saving machinery, thereby giving rise (first
to a short boom and then) to a new wave of unemployment and
depression. Whether there is any truth in this theory, and how
much, I do not know. As I said in the last chapter, the theory of the
trade cycle is a rather difficult subject, and one upon which I do
not intend to embark. But since Marx’s contention that the increase
of productivity is one of the factors contributing to the trade cycle
seems to me important, I may be permitted to develop some rather
obvious considerations in its support.
The following list of possible developments is, of course, quite
incomplete; but it is constructed in such a way that whenever the
productivity of labour increases, then at least one of the following
developments, and possibly many at a time, must commence and
must proceed in a degree sufficient to balance the increase in
productivity.

(A) Investments increase, that is to say, such capital goods are
produced as strengthen the power for producing other goods.
(Since this leads to a further increase of productivity it cannot
alone balance its effects for any length of time.)
(B) Consumption increases—the standard of living rises:
(a) that of the whole population;
(b) that of certain parts of it (for instance, of a certain
class).
(C) Labour time decreases.
(a) the daily labour hours are reduced;
(b) the number of people who are not industrial workers
increases, and especially
(b1) the number of scientists, physicians, artists,
business men, etc., increases.
(b2) the number of unemployed workers increases.
(D) The quantity of goods produced but not consumed
increases.
(a) consumption goods are destroyed;
(b) capital goods are not used (factories are idle);
(c) goods, other than consumption goods and goods of the
type (A), are produced, for instance, arms;
(d) labour is used to destroy capital goods (and thereby to
reduce productivity).
I have listed these developments—the list could, of course, be
elaborated—in such a way that down to the dotted line, i.e. down
to (C, b1), the developments as such are generally recognized as
desirable, whilst from (C, b2) onward come those which are
generally taken to be undesirable; they indicate depression, the
manufacture of armaments, and war.
Now it is clear that since (A) alone cannot restore the balance
for good, although it may be a very important factor, one or several
of the other developments must set in. It seems, further, reasonable
to assume that if no institutions exist which guarantee that the
desirable developments proceed in a degree sufficient to balance
the increased productivity, some of the undesirable developments
will begin. But all of these, with the possible exception of
armament production, are of such a character that they are likely to
lead to a sharp reduction of (A), which must severely aggravate the
situation.
I do not think that such considerations as the above are able to
‘explain’ armament or war in any sense of the word, although they

may explain the success of totalitarian states in fighting
unemployment. Nor do I think that they are able to ‘explain’ the
trade cycle, although they may perhaps contribute something to
such an explanation, in which problems of credit and money are
likely to play a very important part; for the reduction of (A), for
instance, may be equivalent to the hoarding of such savings as
would otherwise probably be invested—a much-discussed and
important factor4. And it is not quite impossible that the Marxist
law of the falling rate of profit (if this law is at all tenable5) may
also give a hint for the explanation of hoarding; for assuming that a
period of quick accumulation may lead to such a fall, this might
discourage investments and encourage hoarding, and reduce (A).
But all this would not be a theory of the trade cycle. Such a
theory would have a different task. Its main task would be to
explain why the institution of the free market, as such a very
efficient instrument for equalizing supply and demand, docs not
suffice to prevent depressions6, i.e. overproduction or
underconsumption. In other words, we should have to show that
the buying and selling on the market produces, as one of the
unwanted social repercussions7 of our actions, the trade cycle. The
Marxist theory of the trade cycle has precisely this aim in view;
and the considerations sketched here regarding the effects of a
general tendency towards increasing productivity can at the best
only supplement this theory.
I am not going to pronounce judgement on the merits of all
these speculations upon the trade cycle. But it seems to me quite
clear that they are most valuable even if in the light of modern
theories they should by now be entirely superseded. The mere fact
that Marx treated this problem extensively is greatly to his credit.
This much at least of his prophecy has come true, for the time
being; the tendency towards an increase of productivity continues:
the trade cycle also continues, and its continuation is likely to lead
to interventionist counter-measures and therefore to a further
restriction of the free market system; a development which
conforms to Marx’s prophecy that the trade cycle would be one of
the factors that must bring about the downfall of the unrestrained
system of capitalism. And to this, we must add that other piece of
successful prophecy, namely, that the association of the workers
would be another important factor in this process.
In view of this list of important and largely successful
prophecies, is it justifiable to speak of the poverty of historicism?

If Marx’s historical prophecies have been even partially successful
then we should certainly not dismiss his method lightly. But a
closer view of Marx’s successes shows that it was nowhere his
historicist method which led him to success, but always the
methods of institutional analysis. Thus it is not an historicist but a
typical institutional analysis which leads to the conclusion that the
capitalist is forced by competition to increase productivity. It is an
institutional analysis on which Marx bases his theory of the trade
cycle and of surplus population. And even the theory of class
struggle is institutional; it is part of the mechanism by which the
distribution of wealth as well as of power is controlled, a
mechanism which makes possible collective bargaining in the
widest sense. Nowhere in these analyses do the typical historicist
‘laws of historical development’, or stages, or periods, or
tendencies, play any part whatever. On the other hand, none of
Marx’s more ambitious historicist conclusions, none of his
‘inexorable laws of development’ and his ‘stages of history which
cannot be leaped over’, has ever turned out to be a successful
prediction. Marx was successful only in so far as he was analysing
institutions and their functions. And the opposite is true also: none
of his more ambitious and sweeping historical prophecies falls
within the scope of institutional analysis. Wherever the attempt is
made to back them up by such an analysis, the derivation is
invalid. Indeed, compared with Marx’s own high standards, the
more sweeping prophecies are on a rather low intellectual level.
They contain not only a lot of wishful thinking, they are also
lacking in political imagination. Roughly speaking, Marx shared
the belief of the progressive industrialist, of the ‘bourgeois’ of his
time: the belief in a law of progress. But this naive historicist
optimism, of Hegel and Comte, of Marx and Mill, is no less
superstitious than a pessimistic historicism like that of Plato and
Spengler. And it is a very bad outfit for a prophet, since it must
bridle historical imagination. Indeed, it is necessary to recognize as
one of the principles of any unprejudiced view of politics that
everything is possible in human affairs; and more particularly that
no conceivable development can be excluded on the grounds that it
may violate the so-called tendency of human progress, or any other
of the alleged laws of ‘human nature’. ‘The fact of progress’,
writes8 H. A. L. Fisher, ‘is written plain and large on the page of
history; but progress is not a law of nature. The ground gained by
one generation may be lost by the next.’

In accordance with the principle that everything is possible it
may be worth while to point out that Marx’s prophecies might well
have come true. A faith like the progressivist optimism of the
nineteenth century can be a powerful political force; it can help to
bring about what it has predicted. Thus even a correct prediction
must not be accepted too readily as a corroboration of a theory, and
of its scientific character. It may rather be a consequence of its
religious character and a proof of the force of the religious faith
which it has been able to inspire in men. And in Marxism more
particularly the religious element is unmistakable. In the hour of
their deepest misery and degradation, Marx’s prophecy gave the
workers an inspiring belief in their mission, and in the great future
which their movement was to prepare for the whole of mankind.
Looking back at the course of events from 1864 to 1930, I think
that but for the somewhat accidental fact that Marx discouraged
research in social technology, European affairs might possibly
have developed, under the influence of this prophetic religion,
towards a socialism of a non-collectivist type. A thorough
preparation for social engineering, for planning for freedom, on the
part of the Russian Marxists as well as those in Central Europe,
might possibly have led to an unmistakable success, convincing to
all friends of the open society. But this would not have been a
corroboration of a scientific prophecy. It would have been the
result of a religious movement—the result of the faith in
humanitarianism, combined with a critical use of our reason for the
purpose of changing the world.
But things developed differently. The prophetic element in
Marx’s creed was dominant in the minds of his followers. It swept
everything else aside, banishing the power of cool and critical
judgement and destroying the belief that by the use of reason we
may change the world. All that remained of Marx’s teaching was
the oracular philosophy of Hegel, which in its Marxist trappings
threatens to paralyse the struggle for the open society.

Chapter 22: The Moral Theory Of Historicism
The task which Marx set himself in Capital was to discover
inexorable laws of social development. It was not the discovery of
economic laws which would be useful to the social technologist. It
was neither the analysis of the economic conditions which would
permit the realization of such socialist aims as just prices, equal
distribution of wealth, security, reasonable planning of production

and, above all, freedom, nor was it an attempt to analyse and to
clarify these aims.
But although Marx was strongly opposed to Utopian
technology as well as to any attempt at a moral justification of
socialist aims, his writings contained, by implication, an ethical
theory. This he expressed mainly by moral evaluations of social
institutions. After all, Marx’s condemnation of capitalism is
fundamentally a moral condemnation. The system is condemned,
for the cruel injustice inherent in it which is combined with full
‘formal’ justice and righteousness. The system is condemned,
because by forcing the exploiter to enslave the exploited it robs
both of their freedom. Marx did not combat wealth, nor did he
praise poverty. He hated capitalism, not for its accumulation of
wealth, but for its oligarchical character; he hated it because in this
system wealth means political power in the sense of power over
other men. Labour power is made a commodity; that means that
men must sell themselves on the market. Marx hated the system
because it resembled slavery.
By laying such stress on the moral aspect of social institutions,
Marx emphasized our responsibility for the more remote social
repercussions of our actions; for instance, of such actions as may
help to prolong the life of socially unjust institutions.
But although Capital is, in fact, largely a treatise on social
ethics, these ethical ideas are never represented as such. They are
expressed only by implication, but not the less forcibly on that
account, since the implications are very obvious. Marx, I believe,
avoided an explicit moral theory, because he hated preaching.
Deeply distrustful of the moralist, who usually preaches water and
drinks wine, Marx was reluctant to formulate his ethical
convictions explicitly. The principles of humanity and decency
were for him matters that needed no discussion, matters to be taken
for granted. (In this field, too, he was an optimist.) He attacked the
moralists because he saw them as the sycophantic apologists of a
social order which he felt to be immoral; he attacked the eulogists
of liberalism because of their self-satisfaction, because of their
identification of freedom with the formal liberty then existing
within a social system which destroyed freedom. Thus, by
implication, he admitted his love for freedom; and in spite of his
bias, as a philosopher, for holism, he was certainly not a
collectivist, for he hoped that the state would ‘wither away’.

Marx’s faith, I believe, was fundamentally a faith in the open
society.
Marx’s attitude towards Christianity is closely connected with
these convictions, and with the fact that a hypocritical defence of
capitalist exploitation was in his day characteristic of official
Christianity. (His attitude was not unlike that of his contemporary
Kierkegaard, the great reformer of Christian ethics, who exposedl
the official Christian morality of his day as anti-Christian and antihumanitarian hypocrisy.) A typical representative of this kind of
Christianity was the High Church priest J. Townsend, author of A
Dissertation on the Poor Laws, by a Wellwisher of Mankind, an
extremely crude apologist for exploitation whom Marx exposed.
‘Hunger’, Townsend begins his eulogy2, ‘is not only a peaceable,
silent, unremitted pressure but, as the most natural motive of
industry and labour, it calls forth the most powerful exertions.’ In
Townsend’s ‘Christian’ world order, everything depends (as Marx
observes) upon making hunger permanent among the working
class; and Townsend believes that this is indeed the divine purpose
of the principle of the growth of population; for he goes on: ‘It
seems to be a law of nature that the poor should be to a certain
degree improvident, so that there may always be some to fulfil the
most servile, the most sordid, the most ignoble offices in the
community. The stock of human happiness is thereby much
increased, whilst the more delicate .. are left at liberty without
interruption to pursue those callings which are suited to their
various dispositions.’ And the ‘delicate priestly sycophant’, as
Marx called him for this remark, adds that the Poor Law, by
helping the hungry, ‘tends to destroy the harmony and beauty, the
symmetry and order, of that system which God and nature have
established in the world.’
If this kind of ‘Christianity’ has disappeared to-day from the
face of the better part of our globe, it is in no small degree due to
the moral reformation brought about by Marx. I do not suggest that
the reform of the Church’s attitude towards the poor in England
did not commence long before Marx had any influence in England;
but he influenced this development especially on the Continent,
and the rise of socialism had the effect of strengthening it in
England also. His influence on Christianity may be perhaps
compared with Luther’s influence on the Roman Church. Both
were a challenge, both led to a counter-reformation in the camps of
their enemies, to a revision and revaluation of their ethical

standards. Christianity owes not a little to Marx’s influence if it is
to-day on a different path from the one it was pursuing only thirty
years ago. It is even partly due to Marx’s influence that the Church
has listened to the voice of Kierkegaard, who, in his Book of the
Judge, described his own activity as follows3: ‘He whose task it is
to produce a corrective idea, has only to study, precisely and
deeply, the rotten parts of the existing order—and then, in the most
partial way possible, to stress the opposite of it.’ (‘ Since that is
so’, he adds, ‘an apparently clever man will easily raise the
objection of partiality against the corrective idea—and he will
make the public believe that this was the whole truth about it.’) In
this sense one might say that the early Marxism, with its ethical
rigour, its emphasis on deeds instead of mere words, was perhaps
the most important corrective idea of our time4. This explains its
tremendous moral influence.
The demand that men should prove themselves in deeds is
especially marked in some of Marx’s earlier writings. This attitude,
which might be described as his activism, is most clearly
formulated in the last of his Theses on Feuerbach5: ‘The
philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways; the
point however is to change it.’ But there are many other passages
which show the same ‘activist’ tendency; especially those in which
Marx speaks of socialism as the ‘kingdom of freedom’, a kingdom
in which man would become the ‘master of his own social
environment’. Marx conceived of socialism as a period in which
we are largely free from the irrational forces that now determine
our life, and in which human reason can actively control human
affairs. Judging by all this, and by Marx’s general moral and
emotional attitude, I cannot doubt that, if faced with the alternative
‘are we to be the makers of our fate, or shall we be content to be
its prophets?’ he would have decided to be a maker and not merely
a prophet.
But as we already know, these strong ‘activist’ tendencies of
Marx’s are counteracted by his historicism. Under its influence, he
became mainly a prophet. He decided that, at least under
capitalism, we must submit to ‘inexorable laws’ and to the fact that
all we can do is ‘to shorten and lessen the birth-pangs’ of the
‘natural phases of its evolution’6. There is a wide gulf between
Marx’s activism and his historicism, and this gulf is further
widened by his doctrine that we must submit to the purely
irrational forces of history. For since he denounced as Utopian any

attempt to make use of our reason in order to plan for the future,
reason can have no part in bringing about a more reasonable
world. I believe that such a view cannot be defended, and must
lead to mysticism. But I must admit that there seems to be a
theoretical possibility of bridging this gulf, although I do not
consider the bridge to be sound. This bridge, of which there are
only rough plans to be found in the writings of Marx and Engels, I
call their historicist moral theory7.
Unwilling to admit that their own ethical ideas were in any
sense ultimate and self-justifying, Marx and Engels preferred to
look upon their humanitarian aims in the light of a theory which
explains them as the product, or the reflection, of social
circumstances. Their theory can be described as follows. If a social
reformer, or a revolutionary, believes that he is inspired by a hatred
of ‘injustice’, and by a love for ‘justice’, then he is largely a victim
of illusion (like anybody else, for instance the apologists of the old
order). Or, to put it more precisely, his moral ideas of ‘justice’ and
‘injustice’ are by-products of the social and historical
development. But they are by-products of an important kind, since
they are part of the mechanism by which the development propels
itself. To illustrate this point, there are always at least two ideas of
‘justice’ (or of ‘freedom’ or of ‘equality’), and these two ideas
differ very widely indeed. The one is the idea of ‘justice’ as the
ruling class understands it, the other, the same idea as the
oppressed class understands it. These ideas are, of course, products
of the class situation, but at the same time they play an important
part in the class struggle—they have to provide both sides with that
good conscience which they need in order to carry on their fight.
This theory of morality may be characterized as historicist
because it holds that all moral categories are dependent on the
historical situation; it is usually described as historical relativism
in the field of ethics. From this point of view, it is an incomplete
question to ask: Is it right to act in this way? The complete
question would run like this: Is it right, in the sense of fifteenthcentury feudal morality, to act in this way? Or perhaps: Is it right,
in the sense of nineteenth-century proletarian morality, to act in
this way? This historical relativism was formulated by Engels as
follows8: ‘What morality is preached to us to-day? There is first
Christian-feudal morality, inherited from past centuries; and this
again has two main subdivisions, Roman Catholic and Protestant
moralities, each of which in turn has no lack of further

subdivisions, from the Jesuit-Catholic and Orthodox-Protestant to
loose “advanced” moralities. Alongside of these, we find the
modern bourgeois morality, and with it, too, the proletarian
morality of the future ..’
But this so-called ‘historical relativism’ by no means exhausts
the historicist character of the Marxist theory of morals. Let us
imagine we could ask those who hold such a theory, for instance
Marx himself: Why do you act in the way you do? Why would you
consider it distasteful and repulsive, for instance, to accept a bribe
from the bourgeoisie for stopping your revolutionary activities? I
do not think that Marx would have liked to answer such a question;
he would probably have tried to evade it, asserting perhaps that he
just acted as he pleased, or as he felt compelled to. But all this does
not touch our problem. It is certain that in the practical decisions of
his life Marx followed a very rigorous moral code; it is also certain
that he demanded from his collaborators a high moral standard.
Whatever the terminology applied to these things may be, the
problem which faces us is how to find a reply which he might have
possibly made to the question: Why do you act in such a way?
Why do you try, for instance, to help the oppressed? (Marx did not
himself belong to this class, either by birth or by upbringing or by
his way of living.)
If pressed in this way, Marx would, I think, have formulated
his moral belief in the following terms, which form the core of
what I call his historicist moral theory. As a social scientist (he
might have said) I know that our moral ideas are weapons in the
class struggle. As a scientist, I can consider them without adopting
them. But as a scientist I find also that I cannot avoid taking sides
in this struggle; that any attitude, even aloofness, means taking
sides in some way or other. My problem thus assumes the form:
Which side shall I take? When I have chosen a certain side, then I
have, of course, also decided upon my morality. I shall have to
adopt the moral system necessarily bound up with the interests of
the class which I have decided to support. But before making this
fundamental decision, I have not adopted any moral system at all,
provided I can free myself from the moral tradition of my class;
but this, of course, is a necessary prerequisite for making any
conscious and rational decision regarding the competing moral
systems. Now since a decision is ‘moral’ only in relation to some
previously accepted moral code, my fundamental decision can be
no ‘moral’ decision at all. But it can be a scientific decision. For as

a social scientist, I am able to see what is going to happen. I am
able to see that the bourgeoisie, and with it its system of morals, is
bound to disappear, and that the proletariat, and with it a new
system of morals, is bound to win. I see that this development is
inevitable. It would be madness to attempt to resist it, just as it
would be madness to attempt to resist the law of gravity. This is
why my fundamental decision is in favour of the proletariat and of
its morality. And this decision is based only on scientific foresight,
on scientific historical prophecy. Although itself not a moral
decision, since it is not based on any system of morality, it leads to
the adoption of a certain system of morality. To sum up, my
fundamental decision is not (as you suspected) the sentimental
decision to help the oppressed, but the scientific and rational
decision not to offer vain resistance to the developmental laws of
society. Only after I have made this decision am I prepared to
accept, and to make full use of, those moral sentiments which are
necessary weapons in the fight for what is bound to come in any
case. In this way, I adopt the facts of the coming period as the
standards of my morality. And in this way, I solve the apparent
paradox that a more reasonable world will come without being
planned by reason; for according to my moral standards now
adopted, the future world must be better, and therefore more
reasonable. And I also bridge the gap between my activism and my
historicism. For it is clear that even though I have discovered the
natural law that determines the movement of society, I cannot
shuffle the natural phases of its evolution out of the world by a
stroke of the pen. But this much I can do. I can actively assist in
shortening and lessening its birth-pangs.
This, I think, would have been Marx’s reply, and it is this reply
which to me represents the most important form of what I have
called ‘historicist moral theory’. It is this theory to which Engels
alludes when he writes9: ‘Certainly, that morality which contains
the greatest number of elements that are going to last is the one
which, within the present time, represents the overthrow of the
present time; it is the one which represents the future; it is the
proletarian morality ... According to this conception, the ultimate
causes of all social changes and political revolutions are not
increasing insight into justice; they are to be sought not in the
philosophy but in the economics of the epoch concerned. The
growing realization that existing social institutions are irrational
and unjust is only a symptom ..’ It is the theory of which a modern

Marxist says: ‘In founding socialist aspirations on a rational
economic law of social development, instead of justifying them on
moral grounds, Marx and Engels proclaimed socialism a historical
necessity.’10 It is a theory which is very widely held; but it has
rarely been formulated clearly and explicitly. Its criticism is
therefore more important than might be realized at first sight.
First, it is clear enough that the theory depends largely on the
possibility of correct historical prophecy. If this is questioned—
and it certainly must be questioned—then the theory loses most of
its force. But for the purpose of analysing it, I shall assume at first
that historical foreknowledge is an established fact; and I shall
merely stipulate that this historical foreknowledge is limited; I
shall stipulate that we have foreknowledge for, say, the next 500
years, a stipulation which should not restrict even the boldest
claims of Marxist historicism.
Now let us first examine the claim of historicist moral theory
that the fundamental decision in favour of, or against, one of the
moral systems in question is itself not a moral decision; that it is
not based on any moral consideration or sentiment, but on a
scientific historical prediction. This claim is, I think, untenable. In
order to make this quite clear, it will suffice to make explicit the
imperative, or principle of conduct, implied in this fundamental
decision. It is the following principle: Adopt the moral system of
the future! or: Adopt the moral system held by those whose actions
are most useful for bringing about the future! Now it seems clear to
me that even on the assumption that we know exactly what the
next 500 years will be like, it is not at all necessary for us to adopt
such a principle. It is, to give an example, at least conceivable that
some humanitarian pupil of Voltaire who foresaw in 1764 the
development of France down to, say, 1864 might have disliked the
prospect; it is at least conceivable that he would have decided that
this development was rather distasteful and that he was not going
to adopt the moral standards of Napoleon III as his own. I shall be
faithful to my humanitarian standards, he might have said, I shall
teach them to my pupils; perhaps they will survive this period,
perhaps some day they will be victorious. It is likewise at least
conceivable (I do not assert more, at present) that a man who today foresees with certainty that we are heading for a period of
slavery, that we are going to return to the cage of the arrested
society, or even that we are about to return to the beasts, may
nevertheless decide not to adopt the moral standards of this

impending period but to contribute as well as he can to the survival
of his humanitarian ideals, hoping perhaps for a resurrection of his
morality in some dim future.
All that is, at least, conceivable. It may perhaps not be the
‘wisest’ decision to make. But the fact that such a decision is
excluded neither by foreknowledge nor by any sociological or
psychological law shows that the first claim of historicist moral
theory is untenable. Whether we should accept the morality of the
future just because it is the morality of the future, this in itself is
just a moral problem. The fundamental decision cannot be derived
from any knowledge of the future.
In previous chapters I have mentioned moral positivism
(especially that of Hegel), the theory that there is no moral
standard but the one which exists; that what is, is reasonable and
good; and therefore, that might is right. The practical aspect of this
theory is this. A moral criticism of the existing state of affairs is
impossible, since this state itself determines the moral standard of
things. Now the historicist moral theory we are considering is
nothing but another form of moral positivism. For it holds that
coming might is right. The future is here substituted for the
present—that is all. And the practical aspect of the theory is this. A
moral criticism of the coming state of affairs is impossible, since
this state determines the moral standard of things. The difference
between ‘the present’ and ‘the future’ is here, of course, only a
matter of degree. One can say that the future starts to-morrow, or
in 500 years, or in 100. In their theoretical structure there is no
difference between moral conservatism, moral modernism, and
moral futurism. Nor is there much to choose between them in
regard to moral sentiments. If the moral futurist criticizes the
cowardice of the moral conservative who takes sides with the
powers that be then the moral conservative can return the charge;
he can say that the moral futurist is a coward since he takes sides
with the powers that will be, with the rulers of to-morrow.
I feel sure that, had he considered these implications, Marx
would have repudiated historicist moral theory. Numerous remarks
and numerous actions prove that it was not a scientific judgement
but a moral impulse, the wish to help the oppressed, the wish to
free the shamelessly exploited and miserable workers, which led
him to socialism. I do not doubt that it is this moral appeal that is
the secret of the influence of his teaching. And the force of this
appeal was tremendously strengthened by the fact that he did not

preach morality in the abstract. He did not pretend to have any
right to do so. Who, he seems to have asked himself, lives up to his
own standard, provided it is not a very low one? It was this feeling
which led him to rely, in ethical matters, on under-statements, and
which led him to the attempt to find in prophetic social science an
authority in matters of morals more reliable than he felt himself to
be.
Surely, in Marx’s practical ethics such categories as freedom
and equality played the major role. He was, after all, one of those
who took the ideals of 1789 seriously. And he had seen how
shamelessly a concept like ‘freedom’ could be twisted. This is why
he did not preach freedom in words—why he preached it in action.
He wanted to improve society and improvement meant to him
more freedom, more equality, more justice, more security, higher
standards of living, and especially that shortening of the working
day which at once gives the workers some freedom. It was his
hatred of hypocrisy, his reluctance to speak about these ‘high
ideals’, together with his amazing optimism, his trust that all this
would be realized in the near future, which led him to veil his
moral beliefs behind historicist formulations. Marx, I assert, would
not seriously have defended moral positivism in the form of moral
futurism if he had seen that it implies the recognition of future
might as right. But there are others who do not possess his
passionate love of humanity, who are moral futurists just because
of these implications, i.e. opportunists wishing to be on the
winning side. Moral futurism is widespread to-day. Its deeper, nonopportunist basis is probably the belief that goodness must
‘ultimately’ triumph over wickedness. But moral futurists forget
that we are not going to live to witness the ‘ultimate’ outcome of
present events. ‘History will be our judge!’ What does this mean?
That success will judge. The worship of success and of future
might is the highest standard of many who would never admit that
present might is right. (They quite forget that the present is the
future of the past.) The basis of all this is a half-hearted
compromise between a moral optimism and a moral scepticism. It
seems to be hard to believe in one’s conscience. And it seems to be
hard to resist the impulse to be on the winning side.
All these critical remarks are consistent with the assumption
that we can predict the future for the next, say, 500 years. But if we
drop this entirely fictitious assumption, then historicist moral
theory loses all its plausibility. And we must drop it. For there is

no prophetic sociology to help us in selecting a moral system. We
cannot shift our responsibility for such a selection on to anybody,
not even on to ‘the future’.
Marx’s historicist moral theory is, of course, only the result of
his view concerning the method of social science, of his
sociological determinism, a view which has become rather
fashionable in our day. All our opinions, it is said, including our
moral standards, depend upon society and its historical state. They
are the products of society or of a certain class situation. Education
is defined as a special process by which the community attempts to
‘pass on’ to its members ‘its culture including the standards by
which it would have them to live’11, and the ‘relativity of
educational theory and practice to a prevailing order’ is
emphasized. Science, too, is said to depend on the social stratum of
the scientific worker, etc.
A theory of this kind which emphasizes the sociological
dependence of our opinions is sometimes called sociologism; if the
historical dependence is emphasized, it is called historism.
(Historism must not, of course, be mixed up with historicism.)
Both sociologism and historism, in so far as they maintain the
determination of scientific knowledge by society or history, will be
discussed in the next two chapters. In so far as sociologism bears
upon moral theory, a few remarks may be added here. But before
going into any detail, I wish to make quite clear my opinion
concerning these Hegelianizing theories. I believe that they chatter
trivialities clad in the jargon of oracular philosophy.
Let us examine this moral ‘sociologism’. That man, and his
aims, are in a certain sense a product of society is true enough. But
it is also true that society is a product of man and of his aims and
that it may become increasingly so. The main question is: Which
of these two aspects of the relations between men and society is
more important? Which is to be stressed?
We shall understand sociologism better if we compare it with
the analogous ‘naturalistic’ view that man and his aims are a
product of heredity and environment. Again we must admit that
this is true enough. But it is also quite certain that man’s
environment is to an increasing extent a product of him and his
aims (to a limited extent, the same might be said even of his
heredity). Again we must ask: which of the two aspects is more
important, more fertile? The answer may be easier if we give the
question the following more practical form. We, the generation

now living, and our minds, our opinions, are largely the product of
our parents, and of the way they have brought us up. But the next
generation will be, to a similar extent, a product of ourselves, of
our actions and of the way in which we bring them up. Which of
the two aspects is the more important one for us to-day?
If we consider this question seriously, then we find that the
decisive point is that our minds, our opinions, though largely
dependent on our upbringing are not totally so. If they were totally
dependent on our upbringing, if we were incapable of selfcriticism, of learning from our own way of seeing things, from our
experience, then, of course, the way we have been brought up by
the last generation would determine the way in which we bring up
the next. But it is quite certain that this is not so. Accordingly, we
can concentrate our critical faculties on the difficult problem of
bringing up the next generation in a way which we consider better
than the way in which we have been brought up ourselves.
The situation stressed so much by sociologism can be dealt
with in an exactly analogous way. That our minds, our views, are
in a way a product of ‘society’ is trivially true. The most important
part of our environment is its social part; thought, in particular, is
very largely dependent on social intercourse; language, the
medium of thought, is a social phenomenon. But it simply cannot
be denied that we can examine thoughts, that we can criticize
them, improve them, and further that we can change and improve
our physical environment according to our changed, improved
thoughts. And the same is true of our social environment.
All these considerations are entirely independent of the
metaphysical ‘problem of free will’. Even the indeterminist admits
a certain amount of dependence on heredity and on environmental,
especially social, influence. On the other hand, the determinist
must agree that our views and actions are not fully and solely
determined by heredity, education, and social influences. He has to
admit that there are other factors, for instance, the more
‘accidental’ experiences accumulated during one’s life, and that
these also exert their influence. Determinism or indeterminism, as
long as they remain within their metaphysical boundaries, do not
affect our problem. But the point is that they may trespass beyond
these boundaries; that metaphysical determinism, for instance, may
encourage sociological determinism or ‘sociologism’. But in this
form, the theory can be confronted with experience. And
experience shows that it is certainly false.

Beethoven, to take an instance from the field of aesthetics,
which has a certain similarity to that of ethics, is surely to some
extent a product of musical education and tradition, and many who
take an interest in him will be impressed by this aspect of his work.
The more important aspect, however, is that he is also a producer
of music, and thereby of musical tradition and education. I do not
wish to quarrel with the metaphysical determinist who would insist
that every bar Beethoven wrote was determined by some
combination of hereditary and environmental influences. Such an
assertion is empirically entirely insignificant, since no one could
actually ‘explain’ a single bar of his writing in this way. The
important thing is that everyone admits that what he wrote can be
explained neither by the musical works of his predecessors, nor by
the social environment in which he lived, nor by his deafness, nor
by the food which his housekeeper cooked for him; not, in other
words, by any definite set of environmental influences or
circumstances open to empirical investigation, or by anything we
could possibly know of his heredity.
I do not deny that there are certain interesting sociological
aspects of Beethoven’s work. It is well known, for instance, that
the transition from a small to a large symphony orchestra is
connected, in some way, with a socio-political development.
Orchestras cease to be the private hobbies of princes, and are at
least partly supported by a middle class whose interest in music
greatly increases. I am willing to appreciate any sociological
‘explanation’ of this sort, and I admit that such aspects may be
worthy of scientific study. (After all, I myself have attempted
similar things in this book, for instance, in my treatment of Plato.)
What then, more precisely, is the object of my attack? It is the
exaggeration and generalization of any aspect of this kind. If we
‘explain’ Beethoven’s symphony orchestra in the way hinted
above, we have explained very little. If we describe Beethoven as
representing the bourgeoisie in the process of emancipating itself,
we say very little, even if it is true. Such a function could most
certainly be combined with the production of bad music (as we see
from Wagner). We cannot attempt to explain Beethoven’s genius
in this way, or in any way at all.
I think that Marx’s own views could likewise be used for an
empirical refutation of sociological determinism. For if we
consider in the light of this doctrine the two theories, activism and
historicism, and their struggle for supremacy in Marx’s system,

then we will have to say that historicism would be a view more
fitting for a conservative apologist than for a revolutionary or even
a reformer. And, indeed, historicism was used by Hegel with that
tendency. The fact that Marx not only took it over from Hegel, but
in the end permitted it to oust his own activism, may thus show
that the side a man takes in the social struggle need not always
determine his intellectual decisions. These may be determined, as
in Marx’s case, not so much by the true interest of the class he
supported as by accidental factors, such as the influence of a
predecessor, or perhaps by shortsightedness. Thus in this case,
sociologism may further our understanding of Hegel, but the
example of Marx himself exposes it as an unjustified
generalization. A similar case is Marx’s underrating of the
significance of his own moral ideas; for it cannot be doubted that
the secret of his religious influence was in its moral appeal, that his
criticism of capitalism was effective mainly as a moral criticism.
Marx showed that a social system can as such be unjust; that if the
system is bad, then all the righteousness of the individuals who
profit from it is a mere sham righteousness, is mere hypocrisy. For
our responsibility extends to the system, to the institutions which
we allow to persist.
It is this moral radicalism of Marx which explains his
influence; and that is a hopeful fact in itself. This moral radicalism
is still alive. It is our task to keep it alive, to prevent it from going
the way which his political radicalism will have to go. ‘Scientific’
Marxism is dead. Its feeling of social responsibility and its love for
freedom must survive.

The Aftermath
Rationality, in the sense of an appeal to a universal and
impersonal standard of truth, is of supreme importance .. , not only
in ages in which it easily prevails, but also, and even more, in those
less fortunate times in which it is despised and rejected as the vain
dream of men who lack the virility to kill where they cannot agree.
—BERTRAND RUSSELL.

Chapter 23: The Sociology Of Knowledge
It can hardly be doubted that Hegel’s and Marx’s historicist
philosophies are characteristic products of their time—a time of
social change. Like the philosophies of Heraclitus and Plato, and

like those of Comte and Mill, Lamarck and Darwin, they are
philosophies of change, and they witness to the tremendous and
undoubtedly somewhat terrifying impression made by a changing
social environment on the minds of those who live in this
environment. Plato reacted to this situation by attempting to arrest
all change. The more modern social philosophers appear to react
very differently, since they accept, and even welcome, change; yet
this love of change seems to me a little ambivalent. For even
though they have given up any hope of arresting change, as
historicists they try to predict it, and thus to bring it under rational
control; and this certainly looks like an attempt to tame it. Thus it
seems that, to the historicist, change has not entirely lost its terrors.
In our own time of still more rapid change, we even find the
desire not only to predict change, but to control it by centralized
large-scale planning. These holistic views (which I have criticized
in The Poverty of Historicism) represent a compromise, as it were,
between Platonic and Marxian theories. Plato’s will to arrest
change, combined with Marx’s doctrine of its inevitability, yield,
as a kind of Hegelian ‘synthesis’, the demand that since it cannot
be entirely arrested, change should at least be ‘planned’, and
controlled by the state whose power is to be vastly extended.
An attitude like this may seem, at first sight, to be a kind of
rationalism; it is closely related to Marx’s dream of the ‘realm of
freedom’ in which man is for the first time master of his own fate.
But as a matter of fact, it occurs in closest alliance with a doctrine
which is definitely opposed to rationalism (and especially to the
doctrine of the rational unity of mankind; see chapter 24), one
which is well in keeping with the irrationalist and mystical
tendencies of our time. I have in mind the Marxist doctrine that our
opinions, including our moral and scientific opinions, are
determined by class interest, and more generally by the social and
historical situation of our time. Under the name of ‘sociology of
knowledge’ or ‘sociologism’, this doctrine has been developed
recently (especially by M. Scheler and K. Mannheim1) as a theory
of the social determination of scientific knowledge.
The sociology of knowledge argues that scientific thought, and
especially thought on social and political matters, does not proceed
in a vacuum, but in a socially conditioned atmosphere. It is
influenced largely by unconscious or subconscious elements.
These elements remain hidden from the thinker’s observing eye
because they form, as it were, the very place which he inhabits, his

social habitat. The social habitat of the thinker determines a whole
system of opinions and theories which appear to him as
unquestionably true or self-evident. They appear to him as if they
were logically and trivially true, such as, for example, the sentence
‘all tables are tables’. This is why he is not even aware of having
made any assumptions at all. But that he has made assumptions can
be seen if we compare him with a thinker who lives in a very
different social habitat; for he too will proceed from a system of
apparently unquestionable assumptions, but from a very different
one; and it may be so different that no intellectual bridge may exist
and no compromise be possible between these two systems. Each
of these different socially determined systems of assumptions is
called by the sociologists of knowledge a total ideology.
The sociology of knowledge can be considered as a Hegelian
version of Kant’s theory of knowledge. For it continues on the
lines of Kant’s criticism of what we may term the ‘passivist’
theory of knowledge. I mean by this the theory of the empiricists
down to and including Hume, a theory which may be described,
roughly, as holding that knowledge streams into us through our
senses, and that error is due to our interference with the sensegiven material, or to the associations which have developed within
it; the best way of avoiding error is to remain entirely passive and
receptive. Against this receptacle theory of knowledge (I usually
call it the ‘bucket theory of the mind’), Kant argued that
knowledge is not a collection of gifts received by our senses and
stored in the mind as if it were a museum, but that it is very largely
the result of our own mental activity; that we must most actively
engage ourselves in searching, comparing, unifying, generalizing,
if we wish to attain knowledge. We may call this theory the
‘activist’ theory of knowledge. In connection with it, Kant gave up
the untenable ideal of a science which is free from any kind of
presuppositions. (That this ideal is even self-contradictory will be
shown in the next chapter.) He made it quite clear that we cannot
start from nothing, and that we have to approach our task equipped
with a system of presuppositions which we hold without having
tested them by the empirical methods of science; such a system
may be called a ‘categorial apparatus’3. Kant believed that it was
possible to discover the one true and unchanging categorial
apparatus, which represents as it were the necessarily unchanging
framework of our intellectual outfit, i.e. human ‘reason’. This part
of Kant’s theory was given up by Hegel, who, as opposed to Kant,

did not believe in the unity of mankind. He taught that man’s
intellectual outfit was constantly changing, and that it was part of
his social heritage; accordingly the development of man’s reason
must coincide with the historical development of his society, i.e. of
the nation to which he belongs. This theory of Hegel’s, and
especially his doctrine that all knowledge and all truth is ‘relative’
in the sense of being determined by history, is sometimes called
‘historism’ (in contradistinction to ‘historicism’, as mentioned in
the last chapter). The sociology of knowledge or ‘sociologism’ is
obviously very closely related to or nearly identical with it, the
only difference being that, under the influence of Marx, it
emphasizes that the historical development does not produce one
uniform ‘national spirit’, as Hegel held, but rather several and
sometimes opposed ‘total ideologies’ within one nation, according
to the class, the social stratum, or the social habitat, of those who
hold them.
But the likeness to Hegel goes further. I have said above that
according to the sociology of knowledge, no intellectual bridge or
compromise between different total ideologies is possible. But this
radical scepticism is not really meant quite as seriously as it
sounds. There is a way out of it, and the way is analogous to the
Hegelian method of superseding the conflicts which preceded him
in the history of philosophy. Hegel, a spirit freely poised above the
whirlpool of the dissenting philosophies, reduced them all to mere
components of the highest of syntheses, of his own system.
Similarly, the sociologists of knowledge hold that the ‘freely
poised intelligence’ of an intelligentsia which is only loosely
anchored in social traditions may be able to avoid the pitfalls of the
total ideologies; that it may even be able to see through, and to
unveil, the various total ideologies and the hidden motives and
other determinants which inspire them. Thus the sociology of
knowledge believes that the highest degree of objectivity can be
reached by the freely poised intelligence analysing the various
hidden ideologies and their anchorage in the unconscious. The way
to true knowledge appears to be the unveiling of unconscious
assumptions, a kind of psycho-therapy, as it were, or if I may say
so, a socio-therapy. Only he who has been socio-analysed or who
has socio-analysed himself, and who is freed from this social
complex, i.e. from his social ideology, can attain to the highest
synthesis of objective knowledge.

In a previous chapter, when dealing with ‘Vulgar Marxism’ I
mentioned a tendency which can be observed in a group of modern
philosophies, the tendency to unveil the hidden motives behind our
actions. The sociology of knowledge belongs to this group,
together with psycho-analysis and certain philosophies which
unveil the ‘meaninglessness’ of the tenets of their opponents4. The
popularity of these views lies, I believe, in the ease with which
they can be applied, and in the satisfaction which they confer on
those who see through things, and through the follies of the
unenlightened. This pleasure would be harmless, were it not that
all these ideas are liable to destroy the intellectual basis of any
discussion, by establishing what I have called5 a ‘reinforced
dogmatism’. (Indeed, this is something rather similar to a ‘total
ideology’.) Hegelianism does it by declaring the admissibility and
even fertility of contradictions. But if contradictions need not be
avoided, then any criticism and any discussion becomes impossible
since criticism always consists in pointing out contradictions either
within the theory to be criticized, or between it and some facts of
experience. The situation with psycho-analysis is similar : the
psycho-analyst can always explain away any objections by
showing that they are due to the repressions of the critic. And the
philosophers of meaning, again, need only point out that what their
opponents hold is meaningless, which will always be true, since
‘meaninglessness’ can be so defined that any discussion about it is
by definition without meaning6. Marxists, in a like manner, are
accustomed to explain the disagreement of an opponent by his
class bias, and the sociologists of knowledge by his total ideology.
Such methods are both easy to handle and good fun for those who
handle them. But they clearly destroy the basis of rational
discussion, and they must lead, ultimately, to anti-rationalism and
mysticism.
In spite of these dangers, I do not see why I should entirely
forgo the fun of handling these methods. For just like the psychoanalysts, the people to whom psycho-analysis applies best, 7 the
socio-analysts invite the application of their own methods to
themselves with an almost irresistible hospitality. For is not their
description of an intelligentsia which is only loosely anchored in
tradition a very neat description of their own social group? And is
it not also clear that, assuming the theory of total ideologies to be
correct, it would be part of every total ideology to believe that
one’s own group was free from bias, and was indeed that body of

the elect which alone was capable of objectivity? Is it not,
therefore, to be expected, always assuming the truth of this theory,
that those who hold it will unconsciously deceive themselves by
producing an amendment to the theory in order to establish the
objectivity of their own views? Can we, then, take seriously their
claim that by their sociological self-analysis they have reached a
higher degree of objectivity; and their claim that socio-analysis can
cast out a total ideology? But we could even ask whether the whole
theory is not simply the expression of the class interest of this
particular group; of an intelligentsia only loosely anchored in
tradition, though just firmly enough to speak Hegelian as their
mother tongue.
How little the sociologists of knowledge have succeeded in
socio-therapy, that is to say, in eradicating their own total
ideology, will be particularly obvious if we consider their relation
to Hegel. For they have no idea that they are just repeating him; on
the contrary, they believe not only that they have outgrown him,
but also that they have successfully seen through him, socioanalysed him; and that they can now look at him, not from any
particular social habitat, but objectively, from a superior elevation.
This palpable failure in self-analysis tells us enough.
But, all joking apart, there are more serious objections. The
sociology of knowledge is not only self-destructive, not only a
rather gratifying object of socio-analysis, it also shows an
astounding failure to understand precisely its main subject, the
social aspects of knowledge, or rather, of scientific method. It
looks upon science or knowledge as a process in the mind or
‘consciousness’ of the individual scientist, or perhaps as the
product of such a process If considered in this way, what we call
scientific objectivity must indeed become completely
ununderstandable, or even impossible; and not only in the social or
political sciences, where class interests and similar hidden motives
may play a part, but just as much in the natural sciences. Everyone
who has an inkling of the history of the natural sciences is aware of
the passionate tenacity which characterizes many of its quarrels.
No amount of political partiality can influence political theories
more strongly than the partiality shown by some natural scientists
in favour of their intellectual offspring. If scientific objectivity
were founded, as the sociologistic theory of knowledge naively
assumes, upon the individual scientist’s impartiality or objectivity,
then we should have to say good-bye to it. Indeed, we must be in a

way more radically sceptical than the sociology of knowledge; for
there is no doubt that we are all suffering under our own system of
prejudices (or ‘total ideologies’, if this term is preferred); that we
all take many things as self-evident, that we accept them
uncritically and even with the naive and cocksure belief that
criticism is quite unnecessary; and scientists are no exception to
this rule, even though they may have superficially purged
themselves from some of their prejudices in their particular field.
But they have not purged themselves by socio-analysis or any
similar method; they have not attempted to climb to a higher plane
from which they can understand, socio-analyse, and expurgate
their ideological follies. For by making their minds more
‘objective’ they could not possibly attain to what we call ‘scientific
objectivity’. No, what we usually mean by this term rests on
different grounds8. It is a matter of scientific method. And,
ironically enough, objectivity is closely bound up with the social
aspect of scientific method, with the fact that science and scientific
objectivity do not (and cannot) result from the attempts of an
individual scientist to be ‘objective’, but from the friendly-hostile
co-operation of many scientists. Scientific objectivity can be
described as the inter-subjectivity of scientific method. But this
social aspect of science is almost entirely neglected by those who
call themselves sociologists of knowledge.
Two aspects of the method of the natural sciences are of
importance in this connection. Together they constitute what I may
term the ‘public character of scientific method’. First, there is
something approaching free criticism. A scientist may offer his
theory with the full conviction that it is unassailable. But this will
not impress his fellow-scientists and competitors; rather it
challenges them : they know that the scientific attitude means
criticizing everything, and they are little deterred even by
authorities. Secondly, scientists try to avoid talking at crosspurposes. (I may remind the reader that I am speaking of the
natural sciences, but a part of modern economics may be included.)
They try very seriously to speak one and the same language, even
if they use different mother tongues. In the natural sciences this is
achieved by recognizing experience as the impartial arbiter of their
controversies. When speaking of ‘experience’ I have in mind
experience of a ‘public’ character, like observations, and
experiments, as opposed to experience in the sense of more
‘private’ aesthetic or religious experience; and an experience is

‘public’ if everybody who takes the trouble can repeat it. In order
to avoid speaking at cross-purposes, scientists try to express their
theories in such a form that they can be tested, i.e. refuted (or else
corroborated) by such experience.
This is what constitutes scientific objectivity. Everyone who
has learned the technique of understanding and testing scientific
theories can repeat the experiment and judge for himself. In spite
of this, there will always be some who come to judgements which
are partial, or even cranky. This cannot be helped, and it does not
seriously disturb the working of the various social institutions
which have been designed to further scientific objectivity and
criticism; for instance the laboratories, the scientific periodicals,
the congresses. This aspect of scientific method shows what can be
achieved by institutions designed to make public control possible,
and by the open expression of public opinion, even if this is limited
to a circle of specialists. Only political power, when it is used to
suppress free criticism, or when it fails to protect it, can impair the
functioning of these institutions, on which all progress, scientific,
technological, and political, ultimately depends.
In order to elucidate further still this sadly neglected aspect of
scientific method, we may consider the idea that it is advisable to
characterize science by its methods rather than by its results. Let us
first assume that a clairvoyant produces a book by dreaming it, or
perhaps by automatic writing. Let us assume, further, that years
later as a result of recent and revolutionary scientific discoveries, a
great scientist (who has never seen that book) produces one
precisely the same. Or to put it differently we assume that the
clairvoyant ‘saw’ a scientific book which could not then have been
produced by a scientist owing to the fact that many relevant
discoveries were still unknown at that date. We now ask : is it
advisable to say that the clairvoyant produced a scientific book?
We may assume that, if submitted at the time to the judgement of
competent scientists, it would have been described as partly
ununderstandable, and partly fantastic; thus we shall have to say
that the clairvoyant’s book was not when written a scientific work,
since it was not the result of scientific method. I shall call such a
result, which, though in agreement with some scientific results, is
not the product of scientific method, a piece of ‘revealed science’.
In order to apply these considerations to the problem of the
publicity of scientific method, let us assume that Robinson Crusoe
succeeded in building on his island physical and chemical

laboratories, astronomical observatories, etc., and in writing a great
number of papers, based throughout on observation and
experiment. Let us even assume that he had unlimited time at his
disposal, and that he succeeded in constructing and in describing
scientific systems which actually coincide with the results accepted
at present by our own scientists. Considering the character of this
Crusonian science, some people will be inclined, at first sight, to
assert that it is real science and not ‘revealed science’. And, no
doubt, it is very much more like science than the scientific book
which was revealed to the clairvoyant, for Robinson Crusoe
applied a good deal of scientific method. And yet, I assert that this
Crusonian science is still of the ‘revealed’ kind; that there is an
element of scientific method missing, and consequently, that the
fact that Crusoe arrived at our results is nearly as accidental and
miraculous as it was in the case of the clairvoyant. For there is
nobody but himself to check his results; nobody but himself to
correct those prejudices which are the unavoidable consequence of
his peculiar mental history; nobody to help him to get rid of that
strange blindness concerning the inherent possibilities of our own
results which is a consequence of the fact that most of them are
reached through comparatively irrelevant approaches. And
concerning his scientific papers, it is only in attempts to explain his
work to somebody who has not done it that he can acquire the
discipline of clear and reasoned communication which too is part
of scientific method. In one point—a comparatively unimportant
one—is the ‘revealed’ character of the Crusonian science
particularly obvious; I mean Crusoe’s discovery of his ‘personal
equation’ (for we must assume that he made this discovery), of the
characteristic personal reaction-time affecting his astronomical
observations. Of course it is conceivable that he discovered, say,
changes in his reaction-time, and that he was led, in this way, to
make allowances for it. But if we compare this way of finding out
about reaction-time, with the way in which it was discovered in
‘public’ science—through the contradiction between the results of
various observers—then the ‘revealed’ character of Robinson
Crusoe’s science becomes manifest.
To sum up these considerations, it may be said that what we
call ‘scientific objectivity’ is not a product of the individual
scientist’s impartiality, but a product of the social or public
character of scientific method; and the individual scientist’s

impartiality is, so far as it exists, not the source but rather the result
of this socially or institutionally organized objectivity of science.
Both9 Kantians and Hegelians make the same mistake of
assuming that our presuppositions (since they are, to start with,
undoubtedly indispensable instruments which we need in our
active ‘making’ of experiences) can neither be changed by decision
nor refuted by experience; that they are above and beyond the
scientific methods of testing theories, constituting as they do the
basic presuppositions of all thought. But this is an exaggeration,
based on a misunderstanding of the relations between theory and
experience in science. It was one of the greatest achievements of
our time when Einstein showed that, in the light of experience, we
may question and revise our presuppositions regarding even space
and time, ideas which had been held to be necessary
presuppositions of all science, and to belong to its ‘categorial
apparatus’. Thus the sceptical attack upon science launched by the
sociology of knowledge breaks down in the light of scientific
method. The empirical method has proved to be quite capable of
taking care of itself.
But it does so not by eradicating our prejudices all at once; it
can eliminate them only one by one. The classical case in point is
again Einstein’s discovery of our prejudices regarding time.
Einstein did not set out to discover prejudices; he did not even set
out to criticize our conceptions of space and time. His problem was
a concrete problem of physics, the re-drafting of a theory that had
broken down because of various experiments which in the light of
the theory seemed to contradict one another Einstein together with
most physicists realized that this meant that the theory was false.
And he found that if we alter it in a point which had so far been
held by everybody to be self-evident and which had therefore
escaped notice, then the difficulty could be removed. In other
words, he just applied the methods of scientific criticism and of the
invention and elimination of theories, of trial and error. But this
method does not lead to the abandonment of all our prejudices;
rather, we can discover the fact that we had a prejudice only after
having got rid of it.
But it certainly has to be admitted that, at any given moment,
our scientific theories will depend not only on the experiments,
etc., made up to that moment, but also upon prejudices which are
taken for granted, so that we have not become aware of them
(although the application of certain logical methods may help us to

detect them). At any rate, we can say in regard to this incrustation
that science is capable of learning, of breaking down some of its
crusts. The process may never be perfected, but there is no fixed
barrier before which it must stop short. Any assumption can, in
principle, be criticized. And that anybody may criticize constitutes
scientific objectivity.
Scientific results are ‘relative’ (if this term is to be used at all)
only in so far as they are the results of a certain stage of scientific
development and liable to be superseded in the course of scientific
progress. But this does not mean that truth is ‘relative’. If an
assertion is true, it is true for ever10. It only means that most
scientific results have the character of hypotheses, i.e. statements
for which the evidence is inconclusive, and which are therefore
liable to revision at any time. These considerations (with which I
have dealt more fully elsewhere11), though not necessary for a
criticism of the sociologists, may perhaps help to further the
understanding of their theories. They also throw some light, to
come back to my main criticism, on the important role which cooperation, intersubjectivity, and the publicity of method play in
scientific criticism and scientific progress.
It is true that the social sciences have not yet fully attained this
publicity of method. This is due partly to the intelligencedestroying influence of Aristotle and Hegel, partly perhaps also to
their failure to make use of the social instruments of scientific
objectivity. Thus they are really ‘total ideologies’, or putting it
differently, some social scientists are unable, and even unwilling,
to speak a common language. But the reason is not class interest,
and the cure is not a Hegelian dialectical synthesis, nor selfanalysis. The only course open to the social sciences is to forget all
about the verbal fireworks and to tackle the practical problems of
our time with the help of the theoretical methods which are
fundamentally the same in all sciences. I mean the methods of trial
and error, of inventing hypotheses which can be practically tested,
and of submitting them to practical tests. A social technology is
needed whose results can be tested by piecemeal social
engineering. The cure here suggested for the social sciences is
diametrically opposed to the one suggested by the sociology of
knowledge. Sociologism believes that it is not their unpractical
character, but rather the fact that practical and theoretical problems
are too much intertwined in the field of social and political
knowledge, that creates the methodological difficulties of these

sciences. Thus we can read in a leading work on the sociology of
knowledge12 : ‘The peculiarity of political knowledge, as opposed
to "exact" knowledge, lies in the fact that knowledge and will, or
the rational element and the range of the irrational, are inseparably
and essentially intertwined.’ To this we can reply that ‘knowledge’
and ‘will’ are, in a certain sense, always inseparable; and that this
fact need not lead to any dangerous entanglement. No scientist can
know without making an effort, without taking an interest; and in
his effort there is usually even a certain amount of self-interest
involved. The engineer studies things mainly from a practical point
of view. So does the farmer. Practice is not the enemy of
theoretical knowledge but the most valuable incentive to it.
Though a certain amount of aloofness may be becoming to the
scientist, there are many examples to show that it is not always
important for a scientist to be thus disinterested. But it is important
for him to remain in touch with reality, with practice, for those
who overlook it have to pay by lapsing into scholasticism.
Practical application of our findings is thus the means by which we
may eliminate irrationalism from social science, and not any
attempt to separate knowledge from ‘will’.
As opposed to this, the sociology of knowledge hopes to
reform the social sciences by making the social scientists aware of
the social forces and ideologies which unconsciously beset them.
But the main trouble about prejudices is that there is no such direct
way of getting rid of them. For how shall we ever know that we
have made any progress in our attempt to rid ourselves from
prejudice? Is it not a common experience that those who are most
convinced of having got rid of their prejudices are most
prejudiced? The idea that a sociological or a psychological or an
anthropological or any other study of prejudices may help us to rid
ourselves of them is quite mistaken; for many who pursue these
studies are full of prejudice; and not only does self-analysis not
help us to overcome the unconscious determination of our views, it
often leads to even more subtle self-deception. Thus we can read in
the same work on the sociology of knowledge13 the following
references to its own activities : ‘There is an increasing tendency
towards making conscious the factors by which we have so far
been unconsciously ruled ... Those who fear that our increasing
knowledge of determining factors may paralyse our decisions and
threaten “freedom" should put their minds at rest. For only he is
truly determined who does not know the most essential

determining factors but acts immediately under the pressure of
determinants unknown to him.’ Now this is clearly just a repetition
of a pet idea of Hegel’s which Engels naively repeated when he
said14 : ‘Freedom is the appreciation of necessity.’ And it is a
reactionary prejudice. For are those who act under the pressure of
well-known determinants, for example, of a political tyranny,
made free by their knowledge? Only Hegel could tell us such tales.
But that the sociology of knowledge preserves this particular
prejudice shows clearly enough that there is no possible short-cut
to rid us of our ideologies. (Once a Hegelian, always a Hegelian.)
Self-analysis is no substitute for those practical actions which are
necessary for establishing the democratic institutions which alone
can guarantee the freedom of critical thought, and the progress of
science.

Chapter 24: Oracular Philosophy And The Revolt
Against Reason
Marx was a rationalist. With Socrates, and with Kant, he
believed in human reason as the basis of the unity of mankind. But
his doctrine that our opinions are determined by class interest
hastened the decline of this belief. Like Hegel’s doctrine that our
ideas are determined by national interests and traditions, Marx’s
doctrine tended to undermine the rationalist belief in reason. Thus
threatened both from the right and from the left, a rationalist
attitude to social and economic questions could hardly resist when
historicist prophecy and oracular irrationalism made a frontal
attack on it. This is why the conflict between rationalism and
irrationalism has become the most important intellectual, and
perhaps even moral, issue of our time.
I
Since the terms ‘reason’ and ‘rationalism’ are vague, it will be
necessary to explain roughly the way in which they are used here.
First, they are used in a wide sense1; they are used to cover not
only intellectual activity but also observation and experiment. It is
necessary to keep this remark in mind, since ‘reason’ and
‘rationalism’ are often used in a different and more narrow sense,
in opposition not to ‘irrationalism’ but to ‘empiricism’; if used in
this way, rationalism extols intelligence above observation and
experiment, and might therefore be better described as
‘intellectualism’. But when I speak here of ‘rationalism’, I use the

word always in a sense which includes ‘empiricism’ as well as
‘intellectualism’; just as science makes use of experiments as well
as of thought. Secondly, I use the word ‘rationalism’ in order to
indicate, roughly, an attitude that seeks to solve as many problems
as possible by an appeal to reason, i.e. to clear thought and
experience, rather than by an appeal to emotions and passions. This
explanation, of course, is not very satisfactory, since all terms such
as ‘reason’ or ‘passion’ are vague; we do not possess ‘reason’ or
‘passions’ in the sense in which we possess certain physical
organs, for example, brains or a heart, or in the sense in which we
possess certain ‘faculties’, for example, the power of speaking, or
of gnashing our teeth.
In order therefore to be a little more precise, it may be better to
explain rationalism in terms of practical attitudes or behaviour "We
could then say that rationalism is an attitude of readiness to listen
to critical arguments and to learn from experience. It is
fundamentally an attitude of admitting that ‘I may be wrong and
you may be right, and by an effort, we may get nearer to the truth.’
It is an attitude which does not lightly give up hope that by such
means as argument and careful observation, people may reach
some kind of agreement on many problems of importance; and
that, even where their demands and their interests clash, it is often
possible to argue about the various demands and proposals, and to
reach—perhaps by arbitration—a compromise which, because of
its equity, is acceptable. to most, if not to all. In short, the
rationalist attitude, or, as I may perhaps label it, the ‘attitude of
reasonableness’, is very similar to the scientific attitude, to the
belief that in the search for truth we need co-operation, and that,
with the help of argument, we can in time attain something like
objectivity.
It is of some interest to analyse this resemblance between this
attitude of reasonableness and that of science more fully. In the last
chapter, I tried to explain the social aspect of scientific method
with the help of the fiction of a scientific Robinson Crusoe. An
exactly analogous consideration can show the social character of
reasonableness, as opposed to intellectual gifts, or cleverness.
Reason, like language, can be said to be a product of social life. A
Robinson Crusoe (marooned in early childhood) might be clever
enough to master many difficult situations; but he would invent
neither language nor the art of argumentation. Admittedly, we
often argue with ourselves; but we are accustomed to do so only

because we have learned to argue with others, and because we
have learned in this way that the argument counts, rather than the
person arguing. (This last consideration cannot, of course, tip the
scales when we argue with ourselves.) Thus we can say that we
owe our reason, like our language, to intercourse with other men.
The fact that the rationalist attitude considers the argument
rather than the person arguing is of far-reaching importance. It
leads to the view that we must recognize everybody with whom
We communicate as a potential source of argument and of
reasonable information; it thus establishes what may be described
as the ‘rational unity of mankind’.
In a way, our analysis of ‘reason’ may be said to resemble
slightly that of Hegel and the Hegelians, who consider reason as a
social product and indeed as a kind of department of the soul or the
spirit of society (for example, of the nation, or the class) and who
emphasize, under the influence of Burke, our indebtedness to our
social heritage, and our nearly complete dependence on it.
Admittedly, there is some similarity. But there are very
considerable differences also. Hegel and the Hegelians are
collectivists. They argue that, since we owe our reason to
‘society’—or to a certain society such as a nation—‘society’ is
everything and the individual nothing; or that whatever value the
individual possesses is derived from the collective, the real carrier
of all values. As opposed to this, the position presented here does
not assume the existence of collectives; if I say, for example, that
we owe our reason to ‘society’, then I always mean that we owe it
to certain concrete individuals—though perhaps to a considerable
number of anonymous individuals—and to our intellectual
intercourse with them. Therefore, in speaking of a ‘social’ theory
of reason (or of scientific method), I mean more precisely that the
theory is an inter-personal one, and never that it is a collectivist
theory. Certainly we owe a great deal to tradition, and tradition is
very important, but the term ‘tradition’ also has to be analysed into
concrete personal relations2. And if we do this, then we can get rid
of that attitude which considers every tradition as sacrosanct, or as
valuable in itself, replacing this by an attitude which considers
traditions as valuable or pernicious, as the case may be, according
to their influence upon individuals. We thus may realize that each
of us (by way of example and criticism) may contribute to the
growth or the suppression of such traditions.

The position here adopted is very different from the popular,
originally Platonic, view of reason as a kind of ‘faculty’, which
may be possessed and developed by different men in vastly
different degrees. Admittedly, intellectual gifts may be different in
this way, and they may contribute to reasonableness; but they need
not. Clever men may be very unreasonable; they may cling to their
prejudices and may not expect to hear anything worth while from
others. According to our view, however, we not only owe our
reason to others, but we can never excel others in our
reasonableness in a way that would establish a claim to authority;
authoritarianism and rationalism in our sense cannot be reconciled,
since argument, which includes criticism, and the art of listening to
criticism, is the basis of reasonableness. Thus rationalism in our
sense is diametrically opposed to all those modern Platonic dreams
of brave new worlds in which the growth of reason would be
controlled or ‘planned’ by some superior reason. Reason, like
science, grows by way of mutual criticism; the only possible way
of ‘planning’ its growth is to develop those institutions that
safeguard the freedom of this criticism, that is to say, the freedom
of thought. It may be remarked that Plato, even though his theory
is authoritarian, and demands the strict control of the growth of
human reason in his guardians (as has been shown especially in
chapter 8), pays tribute, by his manner of writing, to our interpersonal theory of reason; for most of his earlier dialogues describe
arguments conducted in a very reasonable spirit.
My way of using the term ‘rationalism’ may become a little
clearer, perhaps, if we distinguish between a true rationalism and a
false or a pseudo-rationalism. What I shall call the ‘true
rationalism’ is the rationalism of Socrates. It is the awareness of
one’s limitations, the intellectual modesty of those who know how
often they err, and how much they depend on others even for this
knowledge. It is the realization that we must not expect too much
from reason; that argument rarely settles a question, although it is
the only means for learning—not to see clearly, but to see more
clearly than before.
What I shall call ‘pseudo-rationalism’ is the intellectual
intuitionism of Plato. It is the immodest belief in one’s superior
intellectual gifts, the claim to be initiated, to know with certainty,
and with authority. According to Plato, opinion—even ‘true
opinion’, as we can read in the Timaeus3—’ is shared by all men;
but ‘reason’ (or ‘intellectual intuition’) ‘is shared only by the gods,

and by very few men’ This authoritarian intellectualism, this belief
in the possession of an infallible instrument of discovery, or an
infallible method, this failure to distinguish between a man’s
intellectual powers and his indebtedness to others for all he can
possibly know or understand, this pseudo-rationalism is often
called ‘rationalism’, but it is diametrically opposed to what we call
by this name.
My analysis of the rationalist attitude is undoubtedly very
incomplete, and, I readily admit, a little vague; but it will suffice
for our purpose. In a similar way I shall now describe
irrationalism, indicating at the same time how an irrationalist is
likely to defend it.
The irrationalist attitude may be developed along the following
lines. Though perhaps recognizing reason and scientific argument
as tools that may do well enough if we wish to scratch the surface
of things, or as means to serve some irrational end, the irrationalist
will insist that ‘human nature’ is in the main, not rational. Man, he
holds, is more than a rational animal, and also less. In order to see
that he is less, we need only consider how small is the number of
men who are capable of argument; this is why, according to the
irrationalist, the majority of men will always have to be tackled by
an appeal to their emotions and passions rather than by an appeal
to their reason. But man is also more than just a rational animal,
since all that really matters in his life goes beyond reason. Even the
few scientists who take reason and science seriously are bound to
their rationalist attitude merely because they love it. Thus even in
these rare cases, it is the emotional make-up of man and not his
reason that determines his attitude. Moreover, it is his intuition, his
mystical insight into the nature of things, rather than his reasoning
which makes a great scientist. Thus rationalism cannot offer an
adequate interpretation even of the apparently rational activity of
the scientist. But since the scientific field is exceptionally
favourable to a rationalist interpretation, we must expect that
rationalism will fail even more conspicuously when it tries to deal
with other fields of human activity. And this expectation, so the
irrationalist will continue his argument, proves to be quite
accurate. Leaving aside the lower aspects of human nature, we may
look to one of its highest, to the fact that man can be creative. It is
the small creative minority of men who really matter; the men who
create works of art or of thought, the founders of religions, and the
great statesmen. These few exceptional individuals allow us to

glimpse the real greatness of man. But although these leaders of
mankind know how to make use of reason for their purposes, they
are never men of reason. Their roots lie deeper—deep in their
instincts and impulses, and in those of the society of which they
are parts. Creativeness is an entirely irrational, a mystical faculty ...
II
The issue between rationalism and irrationalism is of long
standing. Although Greek philosophy undoubtedly started off as a
rationalist undertaking, there were streaks of mysticism even in its
first beginnings. It is (as hinted in chapter 10) the yearning for the
lost unity and shelter of tribalism which expresses itself in these
mystical elements within a fundamentally rational approach4. An
open conflict between rationalism and irrationalism broke out for
the first time in the Middle Ages, as the opposition between
scholasticism and mysticism. (It is perhaps not without interest that
rationalism flourished in the former Roman provinces, while men
from the ‘barbarian’ countries were prominent among the mystics.)
In the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries, when the
tide of rationalism, of intellectualism, and of ‘materialism’ was
rising, irrationalists had to pay some attention to it, to argue against
it; and by exhibiting its limitations, and exposing the immodest
claims and dangers of pseudo-rationalism (which they did not
distinguish from rationalism in our sense), some of these critics,
notably Burke, have earned the gratitude of all true rationalists. But
the tide has now turned, and ‘profoundly significant allusions ..
and allegories’ (as Kant puts it) have become the fashion of the
day. An oracular irrationalism has established (especially with
Bergson and the majority of German philosophers and
intellectuals) the habit of ignoring or at best deploring the
existence of such an inferior being as a rationalist. To them the
rationalists—or the ‘materialists’, as they often say—and
especially, the rationalist scientist, are the poor in spirit, pursuing
soulless and largely mechanical activities5, and completely
unaware of the deeper problems of human destiny and of its
philosophy. And the rationalists usually reciprocate by dismissing
irrationalism as sheer nonsense. Never before has the break been
so complete. And the break in the diplomatic relations of the
philosophers proved its significance when it was followed by a
break in the diplomatic relations of the states.

In this issue, I am entirely on the side of rationalism. This is so
much the case that even where I feel that rationalism has gone too
far I still sympathize with it, holding as I do that an excess in this
direction (as long as we exclude the intellectual immodesty of
Plato’s pseudo-rationalism) is harmless indeed as compared with
an excess in the other. In my opinion, the only way in which
excessive rationalism is likely to prove harmful is that it tends to
undermine its own position and thus to further an irrationalist
reaction. It is only this danger which induces me to examine the
claims of an excessive rationalism more closely and to advocate a
modest and self-critical rationalism which recognizes certain
limitations. Accordingly, I shall distinguish in what follows
between two rationalist positions, which I label ‘critical
rationalism’ and ‘uncritical rationalism’ or ‘comprehensive
rationalism’. (This distinction is independent of the previous one
between a ‘true’ and a ‘false’ rationalism, even though a ‘true’
rationalism in my sense will hardly be other than critical.)
Uncritical or comprehensive rationalism can be described as
the attitude of the person who says ‘I am not prepared to accept
anything that cannot be defended by means of argument or
experience’. We can express this also in the form of the principle
that any assumption which cannot be supported either by argument
or by experience is to be discarded6. Now it is easy to see that this
principle of an uncritical rationalism is inconsistent; for since it
cannot, in its turn, be supported by argument or by experience, it
implies that it should itself be discarded. (It is analogous to the
paradox of the liar7, i.e. to a sentence which asserts its own falsity.)
Uncritical rationalism is therefore logically untenable; and since a
purely logical argument can show this, uncritical rationalism can
be defeated by its own chosen weapon, argument.
This criticism may be generalized. Since all argument must
proceed from assumptions, it is plainly impossible to demand that
all assumptions should be based on argument. The demand raised
by many philosophers that we should start with no assumption
whatever and never assume anything about ‘sufficient reason’, and
even the weaker demand that we should start with a very small set
of assumptions (‘ categories’), are both in this form inconsistent.
For they themselves rest upon the truly colossal assumption that it
is possible to start without, or with only a few assumptions, and
still to obtain results that are worth while. (Indeed, this principle of

avoiding all presuppositions is not, as some may think, a counsel
of perfection, but a form of the paradox of the liar8.)
Now all this is a little abstract, but it may be restated in
connection with the problem of rationalism in a less formal way.
The rationalist attitude is characterized by the importance it
attaches to argument and experience. But neither logical argument
nor experience can establish the rationalist attitude; for only those
who are ready to consider argument or experience, and who have
therefore adopted this attitude already, will be impressed by them.
That is to say, a rationalist attitude must be first adopted if any
argument or experience is to be effective, and it cannot therefore
be based upon argument or experience. (And this consideration is
quite independent of the question whether or not there exist any
convincing rational arguments which favour the adoption of the
rationalist attitude.) We have to conclude from this that no rational
argument will have a rational effect on a man who does not want to
adopt a rational attitude. Thus a comprehensive rationalism is
untenable.
But this means that whoever adopts the rationalist attitude does
so because he has adopted, consciously or unconsciously, some
proposal, or decision, or belief, or behaviour; an adoption which
may be called ‘irrational’. Whether this adoption is tentative or
leads to a settled habit, we may describe it as an irrational faith in
reason. So rationalism is necessarily far from comprehensive or
self-contained. This has frequently been overlooked by rationalists
who thus exposed themselves to a beating in their own field and by
their own favourite weapon whenever an irrationalist took the
trouble to turn it against them. And indeed it did not escape the
attention of some enemies of rationalism that one can always
refuse to accept arguments, either all arguments or those of a
certain kind; and that such an attitude can be carried through
without becoming logically inconsistent. This led them to see that
the uncritical rationalist who believes that rationalism is selfcontained and can be established by argument must be wrong.
Irrationalism is logically superior to uncritical rationalism.
Then why not adopt irrationalism? Many who started as
rationalists but were disillusioned by the discovery that a too
comprehensive rationalism defeats itself have indeed practically
capitulated to irrationalism. (This is what has happened to
Whitehead9, if I am not quite mistaken.) But such panic action is
entirely uncalled for. Although an uncritical and comprehensive

rationalism is logically untenable, and although a comprehensive
irrationalism is logically tenable, this is no reason why we should
adopt the latter. For there are other tenable attitudes, notably that
of critical rationalism which recognizes the fact that the
fundamental rationalist attitude results from an (at least tentative)
act of faith—from faith in reason. Accordingly, our choice is open.
We may choose some form of irrationalism, even some radical or
comprehensive form. But we are also free to choose a critical form
of rationalism, one which frankly admits its origin in an irrational
decision (and which, to that extent, admits a certain priority of
irrationalism).
III
The choice before us is not simply an intellectual affair, or a
matter of taste. It is a moral decision10 (in the sense of chapter 5).
For the question whether we adopt some more or less radical form
of irrationalism, or whether we adopt that minimum concession to
irrationalism which I have termed ‘critical rationalism’, will deeply
affect our whole attitude towards other men, and towards the
problems of social life. It has already been said that rationalism is
closely connected with the belief in the unity of mankind.
Irrationalism, which is not bound by any rules of consistency, may
be combined with any kind of belief, including a belief in the
brotherhood of man; but the fact that it may easily be combined
with a very different belief, and especially the fact that it lends
itself easily to the support of a romantic belief in the existence of
an elect body, in the division of men into leaders and led, into
natural masters and natural slaves, shows clearly that a moral
decision is involved in the choice between it and a critical
rationalism.
As we have seen before (in chapter 5), and now again in our
analysis of the uncritical version of rationalism, arguments cannot
determine such a fundamental moral decision. But this does not
imply that our choice cannot be helped by any kind of argument
whatever. On the contrary, whenever we are faced with a moral
decision of a more abstract kind, it is most helpful to analyse
carefully the consequences which are likely to result from the
alternatives between which we have to choose. For only if we can
visualize these consequences in a concrete and practical way, do
we really know what our decision is about; otherwise we decide
blindly. In order to illustrate this point, I may quote a passage from

Shaw’s Saint Joan. The speaker is the Chaplain; he has stubbornly
demanded Joan’s death; but when he sees her at the stake, he
breaks down : ‘I meant no harm. I did not know what it would be
like .. I did not know what I was doing .. If I had known, I would
have torn her from their hands. You don’t know. You haven’t seen
: it is so easy to talk when you don’t know. You madden yourself
with words .. But when it is brought home to you; when you see
the thing you have done; when it is blinding your eyes, stifling
your nostrils, tearing your heart, then—then—O God, take away
this sight from me!’ There were, of course, other figures in Shaw’s
play who knew exactly what they were doing, and yet decided to
do it; and who did not regret it afterwards. Some people dislike
seeing their fellow men burning at the stake and others do not. This
point (which was neglected by many Victorian optimists) is
important, for it shows that a rational analysis of the consequences
of a decision does not make the decision rational; the consequences
do not determine our decision; it is always we who decide. But an
analysis of the concrete consequences, and their clear realization in
what we call our ‘imagination’, makes the difference between a
blind decision and a decision made with open eyes; and since we
use our imagination very little11, we only too often decide blindly.
This is especially so if we arc intoxicated by an oracular
philosophy, one of the most powerful means of maddening
ourselves with words—to use Shaw’s expression.
The rational and imaginative analysis of the consequences of a
moral theory has a certain analogy in scientific method. For in
science, too, we do not accept an abstract theory because it is
convincing in itself; we rather decide to accept or reject it after we
have investigated those concrete and practical consequences which
can be more directly tested by experiment. But there is a
fundamental difference. In the case of a scientific theory, our
decision depends upon the results of experiments. If these confirm
the theory, we may accept it until we find a better one. If they
contradict the theory, we reject it. But in the case of a moral
theory, we can only confront its consequences with our conscience.
And while the verdict of experiments does not depend upon
ourselves, the verdict of our conscience does.
I hope I have made it clear in which sense the analysis of
consequences may influence our decision without determining it.
And in presenting the consequences of the two alternatives
between which we must decide, rationalism and irrationalism, I

warn the reader that I shall be partial. So far, in presenting the two
alternatives of the moral decision before us—it is, in many senses,
the most fundamental decision in the ethical field—I have tried to
be impartial, although I have not hidden my sympathies. But now I
am going to present those considerations of the consequences of
the two alternatives which appear to me most telling, and by which
I myself have been influenced in rejecting irrationalism and
accepting the faith in reason.
Let us examine the consequences of irrationalism first. The
irrationalist insists that emotions and passions rather than reason
are the mainsprings of human action. To the rationalist’s reply that,
though this may be so, we should do what we can to remedy it, and
should try to make reason play as large a part as it possibly can, the
irrationalist would rejoin (if he condescends to a discussion) that
this attitude is hopelessly unrealistic. For it does not consider the
weakness of ‘human nature’, the feeble intellectual endowment of
most men and their obvious dependence upon emotions and
passions.
It is my firm conviction that this irrational emphasis upon
emotion and passion leads ultimately to what I can only describe as
crime. One reason for this opinion is that this attitude, which is at
best one of resignation towards the irrational nature of human
beings, at worst one of scorn for human reason, must lead to an
appeal to violence and brutal force as the ultimate arbiter in any
dispute. For if a dispute arises, then this means that those more
constructive emotions and passions which might in principle help
to get over it, reverence, love, devotion to a common cause, etc.,
have shown themselves incapable of solving the problem. But if
that is so, then what is left to the irrationalist except the appeal to
other and less constructive emotions and passions, to fear, hatred,
envy, and ultimately, to violence? This tendency is very much
strengthened by another and perhaps even more important attitude
which also is in my opinion inherent in irrationalism, namely, the
stress on the inequality of men.
It cannot, of course, be denied that human individuals are, like
all other things in our world, in very many respects very unequal.
Nor can it be doubted that this inequality is of great importance
and even in many respects highly desirable12. (The fear that the
development of mass production and collectivization may react
upon men by destroying their inequality or individuality is one of
the nightmares13 of our times.) But all this simply has no bearing

upon the question whether or not we should decide to treat men,
especially in political issues, as equals, or as much like equals as is
possible; that is to say, as possessing equal rights, and equal claims
to equal treatment; and it has no bearing upon the question whether
we ought to construct political institutions accordingly. ‘Equality
before the law’ is not a fact but a political demand14 based upon a
moral decision; and it is quite independent of the theory—which is
probably false—that ‘all men are born equal’. Now I do not intend
to say that the adoption of this humanitarian attitude of impartiality
is a direct consequence of a decision in favour of rationalism. But a
tendency towards impartiality is closely related to rationalism, and
can hardly be excluded from the rationalist creed. Again, I do not
intend to say that an irrationalist could not consistently adopt an
equalitarian or impartial attitude; and even if he could not do so
consistently, he is not bound to be consistent. But I do wish to
stress the fact that the irrationalist attitude can hardly avoid
becoming entangled with the attitude that is opposed to
equalitarianism. This fact is connected with its emphasis upon
emotions and passions; for we cannot feel the same emotions
towards everybody. Emotionally, we all divide men into those who
are near to us, and those who are far from us. The division of
mankind into friend and foe is a most obvious emotional division;
and this division is even recognized in the Christian
commandment, ‘Love thy enemies!’ Even the best Christian who
really lives up to this commandment (there are not many, as is
shown by the attitude of the average good Christian towards
‘materialists’ and ‘atheists’), even he cannot feel equal love for all
men. We cannot really love ‘in the abstract’; we can love only
those whom we know. Thus the appeal even to our best emotions,
love and compassion, can only tend to divide mankind into
different categories. And this will be more true if the appeal is
made to lesser emotions and passions. Our ‘natural’ reaction will
be to divide mankind into friend and foe; into those who belong to
our tribe, to our emotional community, and those who stand
outside it; into believers and unbelievers; into compatriots and
aliens; into class comrades and class enemies; and into leaders and
led.
I have mentioned before that the theory that our thoughts and
opinions are dependent upon our class situation, or upon our
national interests, must lead to irrationalism. I now wish to
emphasize the fact that the opposite is also true. The abandonment

of the rationalist attitude, of the respect for reason and argument
and the other fellow’s point of view, the stress upon the ‘deeper’
layers of human nature, all this must lead to the view that thought
is merely a somewhat superficial manifestation of what lies within
these irrational depths. It must nearly always, I believe, produce an
attitude which considers the person of the thinker instead of his
thought. It must produce the belief that ‘we think with our blood’,
or ‘with our national heritage’, or with our class’. This view may
be presented in a materialist form or in a highly spiritual fashion;
the idea that we ‘think with our race’ may perhaps be replaced by
the idea of elect or inspired souls who ‘think by God’s grace’. I
refuse, on moral grounds, to be impressed by these differences; for
the decisive similarity between all these intellectually immodest
views is that they do not judge a thought on its own merits. By thus
abandoning reason, they split mankind into friends and foes; into
the few who share in reason with the gods, and the many who
don’t (as Plato says); into the few who stand near and the many
who stand far; into those who speak the untranslatable language of
our own emotions and passions and those whose tongue is not our
tongue. Once we have done this, political equalitarianism becomes
practically impossible.
Now the adoption of an anti-equalitarian attitude in political
life, i.e. in the field of problems concerned with the power of man
over man, is just what I should call criminal. For it offers a
justification of the attitude that different categories of people have
different rights; that the master has the right to enslave the slave;
that some men have the right to use others as their tools.
Ultimately, it will be used, as in Plato15, to justify murder.
I do not overlook the fact that there are irrationalists who love
mankind, and that not all forms of irrationalism engender
criminality. But I hold that he who teaches that not reason but love
should rule opens the way for those who rule by hate. (Socrates, I
believe, saw something of this when he suggested16 that mistrust or
hatred of argument is related to mistrust or hatred of man.) Those
who do not see this connection at once, who believe in a direct rule
of emotional love, should consider that love as such certainly does
not promote impartiality. And it cannot do away with conflict
either. That love as such may be unable to settle a conflict can be
shown by considering a harmless test case, which may pass as
representative of more serious ones. Tom likes the theatre and
Dick likes dancing. Tom lovingly insists on going to a dance while

Dick wants for Tom’s sake to go to the theatre. This conflict
cannot be settled by love; rather, the greater the love, the stronger
will be the conflict. There are only two solutions; one is the use of
emotion, and ultimately of violence, and the other is the use of
reason, of impartiality, of reasonable compromise. All this is not
intended to indicate that I do not appreciate the difference between
love and hate, or that I think that life would be worth living
without love. (And I am quite prepared to admit that the Christian
idea of love is not meant in a purely emotional way.) But I insist
that no emotion, not even love, can replace the rule of institutions
controlled by reason.
This, of course, is not the only argument against the idea of a
rule of love. Loving a person means wishing to make him happy.
(This, by the way, was Thomas Aquinas’ definition of love.) But of
all political ideals, that of making the people happy is perhaps the
most dangerous one. It leads invariably to the attempt to impose
our scale of ‘higher’ values upon others in order to make them
realize what seems to us of greatest importance for their happiness;
in order, as it were, to save their souls. It leads to Utopianism and
Romanticism. We all feel certain that everybody would be happy
in the beautiful, the perfect community of our dreams. And no
doubt, there would be heaven on earth if we could all love one
another. But, as I have said before (in chapter 9), the attempt to
make heaven on earth invariably produces hell. It leads to
intolerance. It leads to religious wars, and to the saving of souls
through the inquisition. And it is, I believe, based on a complete
misunderstanding of our moral duties. It is our duty to help those
who need our help; but it cannot be our duty to make others happy,
since this does not depend on us, and since it would only too often
mean intruding on the privacy of those towards whom we have
such amiable intentions. The political demand for piecemeal (as
opposed to Utopian) methods corresponds to the decision that the
fight against suffering must be considered a duty, while the right to
care for the happiness of others must be considered a privilege
confined to the close circle of their friends. In their case, we may
perhaps have a certain right to try to impose our scale of values—
our preferences regarding music, for example. (And we may even
feel it our duty to open to them a world of values which, we trust,
can so much contribute to their happiness.) This right of ours exists
only if, and because, they can get rid of us; because friendships can
be ended. But the use of political means for imposing our scale of

values upon others is a very different matter. Pain, suffering,
injustice, and their prevention, these are the eternal problems of
public morals, the ‘agenda’ of public policy (as Bentham would
have said). The ‘higher’ values should very largely be considered
as ‘non-agenda’, and should be left to the realm of laissez faire.
Thus we might say : help your enemies; assist those in distress,
even if they hate you; but love only your friends.
This is only part of the case against irrationalism, and of the
consequences which induce me to adopt the opposite attitude, that
is, a critical rationalism. This latter attitude with its emphasis upon
argument and experience, with its device ‘I may be wrong and you
may be right, and by an effort we may get nearer to the truth’, is, as
mentioned before, closely akin to the scientific attitude. It is bound
up with the idea that everybody is liable to make mistakes, which
may be found out by himself, or by others, or by himself with the
assistance of the criticism of others. It therefore suggests the idea
that nobody should be his own judge, and it suggests the idea of
impartiality. (This is closely related to the idea of ‘scientific
objectivity’ as analysed in the previous chapter.) Its faith in reason
is not only a faith in our own reason, but also—and even more—in
that of others. Thus a rationalist, even if he believes himself to be
intellectually superior to others, will reject all claims to authority17
since he is aware that, if his intelligence is superior to that of others
(which is hard for him to judge), it is so only in so far as he is
capable of learning from criticism as well as from his own and
other people’s mistakes, and that one can learn in this sense only if
one takes others and their arguments seriously. Rationalism is
therefore bound up with the idea that the other fellow has a right to
be heard, and to defend his arguments. It thus implies the
recognition of the claim to tolerance, at least18 of all those who are
not intolerant themselves. One does not kill a man when one
adopts the attitude of first listening to his arguments. (Kant was
right when he based the ‘Golden Rule’ on the idea of reason. To be
sure, it is impossible to prove the rightness of any ethical principle,
or even to argue in its favour in just the manner in which we argue
in favour of a scientific statement. Ethics is not a science. But
although there is no ‘rational scientific basis’ of ethics, there is an
ethical basis of science, and of rationalism.) Also the idea of
impartiality leads to that of responsibility; we have not only to
listen to arguments, but we have a duty to respond, to answer,
where our actions affect others. Ultimately, in this way, rationalism

is linked up with the recognition of the necessity of social
institutions to protect freedom of criticism, freedom of thought,
and thus the freedom of men. And it establishes something like a
moral obligation towards the support of these institutions. This is
why rationalism is closely linked up with the political demand for
practical social engineering—piecemeal engineering, of course—in
the humanitarian sense, with the demand for the rationalization of
society19, for planning for freedom, and for its control by reason;
not by ‘science’, not by a Platonic, a pseudo-rational authority, but
by that Socratic reason which is aware of its limitations, and which
therefore respects the other man and does not aspire to coerce
him—not even into happiness. The adoption of rationalism
implies, moreover, that there is a common medium of
communication, a common language of reason; it establishes
something like a moral obligation towards that language, the
obligation to keep up its standards of clarity20 and to use it in such
a way that it can retain its function as the vehicle of argument. That
is to say, to use it plainly; to use it as an instrument of rational
communication, of significant information, rather than as a means
of ‘self-expression’, as the vicious romantic jargon of most of our
educationists has it. (It is characteristic of the modern romantic
hysteria that it combines a Hegelian collectivism concerning
‘reason’ with an excessive individualism concerning ‘emotions’ :
thus the emphasis on language as a means of self-expression
instead of a means of communication. Both attitudes, of course, are
parts of the revolt against reason.) And it implies the recognition
that mankind is united by the fact that our different mother
tongues, in so far as they are rational, can be translated into one
another. It recognizes the unity of human reason.
A few remarks may be added concerning the relation of the
rationalist attitude to the attitude of readiness to use what is usually
called ‘imagination’. It is frequently assumed that imagination has
a close affinity with emotion and therefore with irrationalism, and
that rationalism rather tends towards an unimaginative dry
scholasticism. I do not know whether such a view may have some
psychological basis, and I rather doubt it. But my interests are
institutional rather than psychological, and from an institutional
point of view (as well as from that of method) it appears that
rationalism must encourage the use of imagination because it needs
it, while irrationalism must tend to discourage it. The very fact that
rationalism is critical, whilst irrationalism must tend towards

dogmatism (where there is no argument, nothing is left but full
acceptance or fiat denial), leads in this direction. Criticism always
demands a certain degree of imagination, whilst dogmatism
suppresses it. Similarly, scientific research and technical
construction and invention are inconceivable without a very
considerable use of imagination; one must offer something new in
these fields (as opposed to the field of oracular philosophy where
an endless repetition of impressive words seems to do the trick). At
least as important is the part played by imagination in the practical
application of equalitarianism and of impartiality. The basic
attitude of the rationalist, ‘I may be wrong and you may be right’,
demands, when put into practice, and especially when human
conflicts are involved, a real effort of our imagination. I admit that
the emotions of love and compassion may sometimes lead to a
similar effort. But I hold that it is humanly impossible for us to
love, or to suffer with, a great number of people; nor does it appear
to me very desirable that we should, since it would ultimately
destroy either our ability to help or the intensity of these very
emotions. But reason, supported by imagination, enables us to
understand that men who are far away, whom we shall never see,
are like ourselves, and that their relations to one another are like
our relations to those we love. A direct emotional attitude towards
the abstract whole of mankind seems to me hardly possible. We
can love mankind only in certain concrete individuals. But by the
use of thought and imagination, we may become ready to help all
who need our help.
All these considerations show, I believe, that the link between
rationalism and humanitarianism is very close, and certainly much
closer than the corresponding entanglement of irrationalism with
the anti-equalitarian and anti-humanitarian attitude. I believe that
as far as possible this result is corroborated by experience. A
rationalist attitude seems to be usually combined with a basically
equalitarian and humanitarian outlook; irrationalism, on the other
hand, exhibits in most cases at least some of the anti-equalitarian
tendencies described, even though it may often be associated with
humanitarianism also. My point is that the latter connection is
anything but well founded.
IV
I have tried to analyse those consequences of rationalism and
irrationalism which induce me to decide as I do. I wish to repeat

that the decision is largely a moral decision. It is the decision to try
to take argument seriously. This is the difference between the two
views; for irrationalism will use reason too, but without any feeling
of obligation; it will use it or discard it as it pleases. But I believe
that the only attitude which I can consider to be morally right is
one which recognizes that we owe it to other men to treat them and
ourselves as rational.
Considered in this way, my counter-attack upon irrationalism is
a moral attack. The intellectualist who finds our rationalism much
too commonplace for his taste, and who looks out for the latest
esoteric intellectual fashion, which he discovers in the admiration
of medieval mysticism, is not, one fears, doing his duty by his
fellow men. He may think himself and his subtle taste superior to
our ‘scientific age’, to an ‘age of industrialization’ which carries its
brainless division of labour and its ‘mechanization’ and
‘materialization’ even into the field of human thought21. But he
only shows that he is incapable of appreciating the moral forces
inherent in modern science. The attitude I am attacking can
perhaps be illustrated by the following passage which I take from
A. Keller22; a passage that seems to me a typical expression of this
romantic hostility towards science : ‘We seem to be entering upon
a new era where the human soul is regaining its mystical and
religious faculties, and protesting, by inventing new myths, against
the materialization and mechanization of life. The mind suffered
when it had to serve humanity as technician, as chauffeur; it is
reawakening again as poet and prophet, obeying the command and
leadership of dreams which seem to be quite as wise and reliable
as, but more inspiring and stimulating than, intellectual wisdom
and scientific programmes. The myth of revolution is a reaction
against the unimaginative banality and conceited self-sufficiency
of bourgeois society and of an old tired culture. It is the adventure
of men who have lost all security and are embarking on dreams
instead of concrete facts.’ In analysing this passage I wish first, but
only in passing, to draw attention to its typical historicist character
and to its moral futurism23 (‘ entering a new era’, ‘old and tired
culture’, etc.). But more important even than to realize the
technique of the word-magic which the passage uses is to ask
whether what it says is true. Is it true that our soul protests against
the materialization and mechanization of our life, that it protests
against the progress we have made in the fight against the untold
suffering through hunger and pestilence which characterized the

Middle Ages? Is it true that the mind suffered when it had to serve
humanity as a technician, and was it happier to serve as a serf or a
slave? I do not intend to belittle the very serious problem of purely
mechanical work, of a drudgery which is felt to be meaningless,
and which destroys the creative power of the workers; but the only
practical hope lies, not in a return to slavery and serfdom, but in an
attempt to make machinery take over this mechanical drudgery.
Marx was right in insisting that increased productivity is the only
reasonable hope of humanizing labour, and of further shortening
the labour day. (Besides, I do not think that the mind always
suffers when it has to serve humanity as a technician; I suspect that
often enough, the ‘technicians’, including the great inventors and
the great scientists, rather enjoyed it, and that they were just as
adventurous as the mystics.) And who believes that the ‘command
and leadership of dreams’, as dreamt by our contemporary
prophets, dreamers, and leaders, are really ‘quite as wise and
reliable as intellectual wisdom and scientific programmes’? But we
need only turn to the ‘myth of revolution’, etc., in order to see
more clearly what we are facing here. It is a typical expression of
the romantic hysteria and the radicalism produced by the
dissolution of the tribe and by the strain of civilization (as I have
described it in chapter 10). This kind of ‘Christianity’ which
recommends the creation of myth as a substitute for Christian
responsibility is a tribal Christianity. It is a Christianity that refuses
to carry the cross of being human. Beware of these false prophets!
What they are after, without being aware of it, is the lost unity of
tribalism. And the return to the closed society which they advocate
is the return to the cage, and to the beasts24.
It may be useful to consider how the adherents of this kind of
romanticism are likely to react to such criticism. Arguments will
hardly be offered; since it is impossible to discuss such
profundities with a rationalist, the most likely reaction will be a
high-handed withdrawal, combined with the assertion that there is
no language common to those whose souls have not yet’ regained
their mystical faculties’, and those whose souls possess such
faculties. Now this reaction is analogous to that of the
psychoanalyst (mentioned in the last chapter) who defeats his
opponents not by replying to their arguments but by pointing out
that their repressions prevent them from accepting psycho-analysis.
It is analogous also to that of the socio-analyst who points out that
the total ideologies of his opponents prevent them from accepting

the sociology of knowledge. This method, as I admitted before, is
good fun for those who practise it. But we can see here more
clearly that it must lead to the irrational division of men into those
who are near to us and those who are far from us. This division is
present in every religion, but it is comparatively harmless in
Mohammedanism, Christianity, or the rationalist faith, which all
see in every man a potential convert, and the same may be said of
psycho-analysis, which sees in every man a potential object of
treatment (only that in the last case the fee for conversion
constitutes a serious obstacle). But the division is getting less
harmless when we proceed to the sociology of knowledge. The
socio-analyst claims that only certain intellectuals can get rid of
their total ideology, can be freed from ‘thinking with their class’;
he thus gives up the idea of a potential rational unity of man, and
delivers himself body and soul to irrationalism. And this situation
gets very much worse when we proceed to the biological or
naturalist version of this theory, to the racial doctrine that we
‘think with our blood’ or that we ‘think with our race’. But at least
as dangerous, since more subtle, is the same idea when it appears
in the cloak of a religious mysticism; not in the mysticism of the
poet or musician, but in that of the Hegelianizing intellectualist
who persuades himself and his followers that their thoughts are
endowed, because of special grace, with ‘mystical and religious
faculties’ not possessed by others, and who thus claim that they
‘think by God’s grace’. This claim with its gentle allusion to those
who do not possess God’s grace, this attack upon the potential
spiritual unity of mankind, is, in my opinion, as pretentious,
blasphemous and anti-Christian, as it believes itself to be humble,
pious, and Christian. As opposed to the intellectual irresponsibility
of a mysticism which escapes into dreams and of an oracular
philosophy which escapes into verbiage, modern science enforces
upon our intellect the discipline of practical tests. Scientific
theories can be tested by their practical consequences. The
scientist, in his own field, is responsible for what he says; you can
know him by his fruits, and thus distinguish him from the false
prophets25. One of the few who have appreciated this aspect of
science is the Christian philosopher J. Macmurray (with whose
views on historical prophecy I widely disagree, as will be seen in
the next chapter) : ‘Science itself, he says26, ‘in its own specific
fields of research, employs a method of understanding which
restores the broken integrity of theory and practice.’ This, I

believe, is why science is such an offence in the eyes of mysticism,
which evades practice by creating myths instead. ‘Science, in its
own field,’ says Macmurray in another place, ‘is the product of
Christianity, and its most adequate expression so far; .. its capacity
for co-operative progress, which knows no frontiers of race or
nationality or sex, its ability to predict, and its ability to control,
are the fullest manifestations of Christianity that Europe has yet
seen.’ I fully agree with this, for I too believe that our Western
civilization owes its rationalism, its faith in the rational unity of
man and in the open society, and especially its scientific outlook,
to the ancient Socratic and Christian belief in the brotherhood of
all men, and in intellectual honesty and responsibility. (A frequent
argument against the morality of science is that many of its fruits
have been used for bad purposes, for instance, in war. But this
argument hardly deserves serious consideration. There is nothing
under the sun which cannot be misused, and which has not been
misused. Even love can be made an instrument of murder; and
pacifism can be made one of the weapons of an aggressive war. On
the other hand, it is only too obvious that it is irrationalism and not
rationalism that has the responsibility for all national hostility and
aggression. There have been only too many aggressive religious
wars, both before and after the Crusades, but I do not know of any
war waged for a ‘scientific’ aim, and inspired by scientists.)
It will have been observed that in the passages quoted,
Macmurray emphasizes that what he appreciates is science ‘in its
own specific fields of research’. I think that this emphasis is
particularly valuable. For nowadays one often hears, usually in
connection with the mysticism of Eddington and Jeans, that
modern science, as opposed to that of the nineteenth century, has
become more humble, in that, it now recognizes the mysteries of
this world. But this opinion, I believe, is entirely on the wrong
track. Darwin and Faraday, for instance, sought for truth as humbly
as anybody, and I do not doubt that they were much more humble
than the two great contemporary astronomers mentioned. For great
as these are ‘in their own specific fields of research’, they do not, I
believe, prove their humility by extending their activities to the
field of philosophical mysticism27. Speaking more generally,
however, it may indeed be the case that scientists are becoming
more humble, since the progress of science is largely by way of the
discovery of errors, and since, in general, the more we know, the

more clearly we realize what we do not know. (The spirit of
science is that of Socrates28.)
Although I am mainly concerned with the moral aspect of the
conflict between rationalism and irrationalism, I feel that I should
briefly touch upon a more ‘philosophical’ aspect of the problem;
but I wish to make it clear that I consider this aspect as of minor
importance here. What I have in mind is the fact that the critical
rationalist can turn the tables upon the irrationalist in another way
as well. He may contend that the irrationalist who prides himself
on his respect for the more profound mysteries of the world and his
understanding of them (as opposed to the scientist who just
scratches its surface) in fact neither respects nor understands its
mysteries, but satisfies himself with cheap rationalizations. For
what is a myth if not an attempt to rationalize the irrational? And
who shows greater reverence for mystery, the scientist who
devotes himself to discovering it step by step, always ready to
submit to facts, and always aware that even his boldest
achievement will never be more than a stepping-stone for those
who come after him, or the mystic who is free to maintain anything
because he need not fear any test? But in spite of this dubious
freedom, the mystics endlessly repeat the same thing. (It is always
the myth of the lost tribal paradise, the hysterical refusal to carry
the cross of civilization29.) All mystics, as F. Kafka, the mystical
poet, wrote30 in despair, ‘set out to say .. that the incomprehensible
is incomprehensible, and that we knew before’. And the
irrationalist not only tries to rationalize what cannot be
rationalized, but he also gets hold of the wrong end of the stick
altogether. For it is the particular, the unique and concrete
individual, which cannot be approached by rational methods, and
not the abstract universal. Science can describe general types of
landscape, for example, or of man, but it can never exhaust one
single individual landscape, or one single individual man. The
universal, the typical, is not only the domain of reason, but it is
also largely the product of reason, in so far as it is the product of
scientific abstraction. But the unique individual and his unique
actions and experiences and relations to other individuals can
never be fully rationalized31. And it appears to be just this
irrational realm of unique individuality which makes human
relations important. Most people would feel, for example, that
what makes their lives worth living would largely be destroyed if
they themselves, and their lives, were in no sense unique but in all

and every respect typical of a class of people, so that they repeated
exactly all the actions and experiences of all other men who belong
to this class. It is the uniqueness of our experiences which, in this
sense, makes our lives worth living, the unique experience of a
landscape, of a sunset, of the expression of a human face. But since
the day of Plato, it has been a characteristic of all mysticism that it
transfers this feeling of the irrationality of the unique individual,
and of our unique relations to individuals, to a different field,
namely, to the field of abstract universals, a field which properly
belongs to the province of science. That it is this feeling which the
mystic tries to transfer can hardly be doubted. It is well known that
the terminology of mysticism, the mystical union, the mystical
intuition of beauty, the mystical love, have in all times been
borrowed from the realm of relations between individual men, and
especially from the experience of sexual love. Nor can it be
doubted that this feeling is transferred by mysticism to the abstract
universals, to the essences, to the Forms or Ideas. It is again the
lost unity of the tribe, the wish to return into the shelter of a
patriarchal home and to make its limits the limits of our world,
which stands behind this mystical attitude. ‘The feeling of the
world as a limited whole is the mystical feeling’, says32
Wittgenstein. But this holistic and universalistic irrationalism is
misplaced. The ‘world’ and the ‘whole’ and ‘nature’, all these are
abstractions and products of our reason. (This makes the difference
between the mystical philosopher and the artist who does not
rationalize, who does not use abstractions, but who creates, in his
imagination, concrete individuals and unique experiences.) To sum
up, mysticism attempts to rationalize the irrational, and at the same
time it seeks the mystery in the wrong place; and it does so
because it dreams of the collective33, and the union of the elect,
since it dares not face the hard and practical tasks which those
must face who realize that every individual is an end in himself.
The nineteenth-century conflict between science and religion
appears to me to be superseded34. Since an ‘uncritical’ rationalism
is inconsistent, the problem cannot be the choice between
knowledge and faith, but only between two kinds of faith. The new
problem is : which is the right faith and which is the wrong faith?
What I have tried to show is that the choice with which we are
confronted is between a faith in reason and in human individuals
and a faith in the mystical faculties of man by which he is united to
a collective; and that this choice is at the same time a choice

between an attitude that recognizes the unity of mankind and an
attitude that divides men into friends and foes, into masters and
slaves.
Enough has been said, for the present purpose, to explain the
terms ‘rationalism’ and ‘irrationalism’, as well as my motives in
deciding in favour of rationalism, and the reason why I see in the
irrational and mystical intellectualism which is at present so
fashionable the subtle intellectual disease of our time. It is a
disease which need not be taken too seriously, and it is not more
than skin-deep. (Scientists, with very few exceptions, are
particularly free from it.) But in spite of its superficiality, it is a
dangerous disease, because of its influence in the field of social
and political thought.
V
In order to illustrate the danger, I shall briefly criticize two of
the most influential irrationalist authorities of our time. The first of
them is A. N. Whitehead, famous for his work in mathematics, and
for his collaboration with the greatest contemporary rationalist
philosopher, Bertrand Russell35. Whitehead considers himself a
rationalist philosopher too; but so did Hegel, to whom Whitehead
owes a great deal; indeed, he is one of the few Neo-Hegelians who
know how much they owe to Hegel36 (as well as to Aristotle).
Undoubtedly, he owes it to Hegel that he has the courage, in spite
of Kant’s burning protest, to build up grandiose metaphysical
systems with a royal contempt for argument.
Let us consider first one of the few rational arguments offered
by Whitehead in his Process and Reality, the argument by which
he defends his speculative philosophical method (a method which
he calls ‘rationalism’). ‘It has been an objection to speculative
philosophy’, he writes37, ‘that it is over-ambitious. Rationalism, it
is admitted, is the method by which advance is made within the
limits of particular sciences. It is, however, held that this limited
success must not encourage attempts to frame ambitious schemes
expressive of the general nature of things. One alleged justification
of this criticism is ill-success; European thought is represented as
littered with metaphysical problems, abandoned and unreconciled
.. (But) the same criterion would fasten ill-success upon science.
We no more retain the physics of the seventeenth century than we
do the Cartesian philosophy of the century .. The proper test is not
that of finality, but of progress.’ Now this is in itself certainly a

perfectly reasonable and even plausible argument; but is it valid?
The obvious objection against it is that while physics progresses,
metaphysics does not. In physics, there is a ‘proper test of
progress’, namely the test of experiment, of practice. We can say
why modern physics is better than the physics of the seventeenth
century. Modern physics stands up to a great number of practical
tests which utterly defeat the older systems. And the obvious
objection against speculative metaphysical systems is that the
progress they claim seems to be just as imaginary as anything else
about them. This objection is very old; it dates back to Bacon,
Hume, and Kant. We read, for example, in Kant’s Prolegomena38,
the following remarks concerning the alleged progress of
metaphysics : ‘Undoubtedly there are many who, like myself, have
been unable to find that this science has progressed by so much as
a finger-breadth in spite of so many beautiful things which have
long been published on this subject. Admittedly, we may find an
attempt to sharpen a definition, or to supply a lame proof with new
crutches, and thus to patch up the crazy quilt of metaphysics, or to
give it a new pattern; but this is not what the world needs. We are
sick of metaphysical assertions. We want to have definite criteria
by which we may distinguish dialectical fancies .. from truth.’
Whitehead is probably aware of this classical and obvious
objection; and it looks as if he remembers it when in the sentence
following the one quoted last he writes : ‘But the main objection
dating from the sixteenth century and receiving final expression
from Francis Bacon, is the uselessness of philosophic speculation.’
Since it was the experimental and practical uselessness of
philosophy to which Bacon objected, it looks as if Whitehead here
had our point in mind. But he does not follow it up. He does not
reply to the obvious objection that this practical uselessness
destroys his point that speculative philosophy, like science, is
justified by the progress it makes. Instead, he contents himself with
switching over to an entirely different problem, namely, the wellknown problem ‘that there are no brute, self-contained matters of
fact’, and that all science must make use of thought, since it must
generalize, and interpret, the facts. On this consideration he bases
his defence of metaphysical systems : ‘Thus the understanding of
the immediate brute fact requires its metaphysical interpretation ..’
Now this may be so, or it may not be so. But it is certainly an
entirely different argument from the one he began with. ‘The
proper test is .. progress’, in science as well as in philosophy : this

is what we originally heard from Whitehead. But no answer to
Kant’s obvious objection is forthcoming. Instead, Whitehead’s
argument, once on the track of the problem of universality and
generality, wanders off to such questions as the (Platonic)
collectivist theory of morality39 : ‘Morality of outlook is
inseparably conjoined with generality of outlook. The antithesis
between the general good and the individual interest can be
abolished only when the individual is such that its interest is the
general good ..’
Now this was a sample of rational argument. But rational
arguments are rare indeed. Whitehead has learned from Hegel how
to avoid Kant’s criticism that speculative philosophy only supplies
new crutches for lame proofs. This Hegelian method is simple
enough. We can easily avoid crutches as long as we avoid proofs
and arguments altogether. Hegelian philosophy does not argue; it
decrees. It must be admitted that, as opposed to Hegel, Whitehead
does not pretend to offer the final truth. He is not a dogmatic
philosopher in the sense that he presents his philosophy as an
indisputable dogma; he even emphasizes its imperfections. But like
all Neo-Hegelians, he adopts the dogmatic method of laying down
his philosophy without argument. We can take it or leave it. But
we cannot discuss it. (We are indeed faced with ‘brute facts’; not
with Baconian brute facts of experience, but with the brute facts of
a man’s metaphysical inspiration.) In order to illustrate this
‘method of take it or leave it’, I shall quote just one passage from
Process and Reality; but I must warn my readers that, although I
have tried to select the passage fairly, they should not form an
opinion without reading the book itself.
Its last part, entitled ‘Final Interpretations’, consists of two
chapters, ‘The Ideal Opposites’ (where, for instance, ‘Permanence
and Flux’ occurs, a well-known patch from Plato’s system; we
have dealt with it under the name ‘Change and Rest’), and ‘God
and the World’. I quote from this latter chapter. The passage is
introduced by the two sentences : ‘The final summary can only be
expressed in terms of a group of antitheses, whose apparent selfcontradiction depends on neglect of the diverse categories of
existence. In each antithesis there is a shift of meaning which
converts the opposition into a contrast.’ This is the introduction. It
prepares us for an ‘apparent contradiction’, and tells us that this
‘depends’ on some neglect. This seems to indicate that by avoiding
that neglect we may avoid the contradiction. But how this is to be

achieved, or what is, more precisely, in the author’s mind, we are
not told. We have just to take it or leave it. Now I quote the first
two of the announced ‘antitheses’ or ‘apparent self-contradictions’
which are also stated without a shadow of argument: ‘It is as true
to say that God is permanent and the World fluent as that the
World is permanent and God fluent.—It is as true to say that God
is one and the World many, as that the World is one and God
many.’40 Now I am not going to criticize these echoes of Greek
philosophical fancies; we may indeed take it for granted that the
one is just ‘as true’ as the other. But we have been promised an
‘apparent self-contradiction’; and I should like to know where a
self-contradiction appears here. For to me not even the appearance
of a contradiction is apparent. A self-contradiction would be, for
instance, the sentence : ‘Plato is happy and Plato is not happy’, and
all the sentences of the same ‘logical form’ (that is to say, all
sentences obtained from the foregoing by substituting a proper
name for ‘Plato’ and a property word for ‘happy’). But the
following sentence is clearly not a contradiction : ‘It is as true to
say that Plato is happy to-day as it is to say that he is unhappy today’ (for since Plato is dead, the one is indeed ‘as true’ as the
other); and no other sentence of the same or a similar form can be
called self-contradictory, even if it happens to be false. This is only
to indicate why I am at a loss as to this purely logical aspect of the
matter, the ‘apparent self-contradictions’. And I feel that way
about the whole book. I just do not understand what its author
wished it to convey. Very likely, this is my fault and not his. I do
not belong to the number of the elect, and I fear that many others
are in the same position. This is just why I claim that the method of
the book is irrational. It divides mankind into two parts, a small
number of the elect, and the large number of the lost. But lost as I
am, I can only say that, as I see it, Neo-Hegelianism no longer
looks like that old crazy quilt with a few new patches, so vividly
described by Kant; rather it looks now like a bundle of a few old
patches which have been torn from it.
I leave it to the careful student of Whitehead’s book to decide
whether it has stood up to its own ‘proper test’, whether it shows
progress as compared with the metaphysical systems of whose
stagnation Kant complained; provided he can find the criteria by
which to judge such progress. And I will leave it to the same
student to judge the appropriateness of concluding these remarks
with another of Kant’s comments upon metaphysics41 :

‘Concerning metaphysics in general, and the views I have
expressed on their value, I admit that my formulations may here or
there have been insufficiently conditional and cautious. Yet I do
not wish to hide the fact that I can only look with repugnance and
even with something like hate upon the puffed-up pretentiousness
of all these volumes filled with wisdom, such as are fashionable
nowadays. For I am fully satisfied that the wrong way has been
chosen; that the accepted methods must endlessly increase these
follies and blunders; and that even the complete annihilation of all
these fanciful achievements could not possibly be as harmful as
this fictitious science with its accursed fertility.’
The second example of contemporary irrationalism with which
I intend to deal here is A. J. Toynbee’s A Study of History. I wish
to make it clear that I consider this a most remarkable and
interesting book, and that I have chosen it because of its superiority
to all other contemporary irrationalist and historicist works I know
of. I am not competent to judge Toynbee’s merits as a historian.
But as opposed to other contemporary historicist and irrationalist
philosophers, he has much to say that is most stimulating and
challenging; I at least have found him so, and I owe to him many
valuable suggestions. I do not accuse him of irrationalism in his
own field of historical research. For where it is a question of
comparing evidence in favour of or against a certain historical
interpretation, he uses unhesitatingly a fundamentally rational
method of argument. I have in mind, for instance, his comparative
study of the authenticity of the Gospels as historical records, with
its negative results42; although I am not able to judge his evidence,
the rationality of the method is beyond question, and this is the
more admirable as Toynbee’s general sympathies with Christian
orthodoxy might have made it hard for him to defend a view
which, to say the least, is unorthodox43. I also agree with many of
the political tendencies expressed in his work, and most
emphatically with his attack upon modern nationalism, and the
tribalist and ‘archaist’, i.e. culturally reactionary tendencies, which
are connected with it.
The reason why, in spite of all this, I single out Toynbee’s
monumental historicist work in order to charge it with irrationality,
is that only when we see the effects of this poison in a work of
such merit do we fully appreciate its danger.
What I must describe as Toynbee’s irrationalism expresses
itself in various ways. One of them is that he yields to a

widespread and dangerous fashion of our time. I mean the fashion
of not taking arguments seriously, and at their face value, at least
tentatively, but of seeing in them nothing but a way in which
deeper irrational motives and tendencies express themselves. It is
the attitude of socio-analysis, criticized in the last chapter; the
attitude of looking at once for the unconscious motives and
determinants in the social habitat of the thinker, instead of first
examining the validity of the argument itself.
This attitude may be justified to a certain extent, as I have tried
to show in the two previous chapters; and this is especially so in
the case of an author who does not offer any arguments, or whose
arguments are obviously not worth looking into. But if no attempt
is made to take serious arguments seriously, then I believe that we
are justified in making the charge of irrationalism; and we are even
justified in retaliating, by adopting the same attitude towards the
procedure. Thus I think that we have every right to make the socioanalytical diagnosis that Toynbee’s neglect to take serious
arguments seriously is representative of a twentieth-century
intellectualism which expresses its disillusionment, or even
despair, of reason, and of a rational solution of our social
problems, by an escape into a religious mysticism44.
As an example of the refusal to take serious arguments
seriously, I select Toynbee’s treatment of Marx. My reasons for
this selection are the following. First, it is a topic which is familiar
to myself as well as to the reader of this book. Secondly, it is a
topic on which I agree with Toynbee in most of its practical
aspects. His main judgements on Marx’s political and historical
influence are very similar to results at which I have arrived by
more pedestrian methods; and it is indeed one of the topics whose
treatment shows his great historical intuition. Thus I shall hardly
be suspected of being an apologist for Marx if I defend Marx’s
rationality against Toynbee. For this is the point on which I
disagree : Toynbee treats Marx (as he treats everybody) not as a
rational being, a man who offers arguments for what he teaches.
Indeed, the treatment of Marx, and of his theories, only
exemplifies the general impression conveyed by Toynbee’s work
that arguments are an unimportant mode of speech, and that the
history of mankind is a history of emotions, passions, religions,
irrational philosophies, and perhaps of art and poetry; but that it
has nothing whatever to do with the history of human reason or of
human science. (Names like Galileo and Newton, Harvey and

Pasteur, do not play any part in the first six volumes45 of
Toynbee’s historicist study of the life-cycle of civilizations.)
Regarding the points of similarity between Toynbee’s and my
general views of Marx, I may remind the reader of my allusions, in
chapter 1, to the analogy between the chosen people and the
chosen class; and in various other places, I have commented
critically upon Marx’s doctrines of historical necessity, and
especially of the inevitability of the social revolution. These ideas
are linked together by Toynbee with his usual brilliance : ‘The
distinctively Jewish .. inspiration of Marxism’, he writes46, ‘is the
apocalyptic vision of a violent revolution which is inevitable
because it is the decree .. of God himself, and which is to invert the
present roles of Proletariat and Dominant Minority in .. a reversal
of roles which is to carry the Chosen People, at one bound, from
the lowest to the highest place in the Kingdom of This World.
Marx has taken the Goddess “Historical Necessity” in place of
Yahweh for his omnipotent deity, and the internal proletariat of the
modern Western World in place of Jewry; and his Messianic
Kingdom is conceived as a Dictatorship of the Proletariat. But the
salient features of the traditional Jewish apocalypse protrude
through this threadbare disguise, and it is actually the preRabbinical Maccabaean Judaism that our philosopher-impresario is
presenting in modern Western costume ..’ Now there is certainly
not much in this brilliantly phrased passage with which I do not
agree, as long as it is intended as nothing more than an interesting
analogy. But if it is intended as a serious analysis (or part of it) of
Marxism, then I must protest; Marx, after all, wrote Capital,
studied laissez faire capitalism, and made serious and most
important contributions to social science, even if much of them has
been superseded. And, indeed, Toynbee’s passage is intended as a
serious analysis; he believes that his analogies and allegories
contribute to a serious appreciation of Marx; for in an Annex to
this passage (from which I have quoted only an important part) he
treats, under the title47 ‘Marxism, Socialism, and Christianity’,
what he considers to be likely objections of a Marxist to this
‘account of the Marxian Philosophy’. This Annex itself is also
undoubtedly intended as a serious discussion of Marxism, as can
be seen by the fact that its first paragraph commences with the
words ‘The advocates of Marxism will perhaps protest that ..’ and
the second with the words : ‘In attempting to reply to a Marxian
protest on such lines as these ..’ But if we look more closely into

this discussion, then we find that none of the rational arguments or
claims of Marxism is even mentioned, let alone examined. Of
Marx’s theories and of the question whether they are true or false
we do not hear a word. The one additional problem raised in the
Annex is again one of historical origin; for the opponent envisaged
by Toynbee does not protest, as any Marxist in his senses would,
that it is Marx’s claim to have based an old idea, socialism, upon a
new, namely a rational and scientific, basis; instead, he ‘protests’ (I
am quoting Toynbee) ‘that in a rather summary account of
Marxian Philosophy .. we have made a show of analysing this into
a Hegelian and a Jewish and a Christian constituent element
without having said a word about the most characteristic .. part of
Marx’s message ... Socialism, the Marxian will tell us, is the
essence of the Marxian way of life; it is an original element in the
Marxian system which cannot be traced to a Hegelian or a
Christian or a Jewish or any other pre-Marxian source’. This is
the protest put by Toynbee into the mouth of a Marxist, although
any Marxist, even if he has read nothing but the Manifesto, must
know that Marx himself as early as in 1847 distinguished about
seven or eight different ‘pre-Marxian sources’ of socialism, and
among them also those which he labelled ‘Clerical’ or ‘Christian’
socialism, and that he never dreamt of having discovered
socialism, but only claimed that he had made it rational; or, as
Engels expresses it, that he had developed socialism from a
Utopian idea into a science48. But Toynbee neglects all that. ‘In
attempting’, he writes, ‘to reply to a Marxian protest on such lines
as these, we shall readily admit the humaneness and
constructiveness of the ideal for which socialism stands, as well as
the importance of the part which this ideal plays in the Marxian
“ideology”; but we shall find ourselves unable to accept the
Marxian contention that Socialism is Marx’s original discovery.
We shall have to point out, on our part, that there is a Christian
socialism which was practised as well as preached before the
Marxian Socialism was ever heard of; and, when our turn comes
for taking the offensive, we shall .. maintain that the Marxian
Socialism is derived from the Christian tradition ..’ Now I would
certainly never deny this derivation, and it is quite clear that every
Marxist could admit it without sacrificing the tiniest bit of his
creed; for the Marxist creed is not that Marx was the inventor of a
humane and constructive ideal but that he was the scientist who by

purely rational means showed that socialism will come, and in
what way it will come.
How, I ask, can it be explained that Toynbee discusses
Marxism on lines which have nothing whatever to do with its
rational claims? The only explanation I can see is that the Marxist
claim to rationality has no meaning whatever for Toynbee. He is
interested only in the question of how it originated as a religion.
Now I should be the last to deny its religious character. But the
method of treating philosophies or religions entirely from the point
of view of their historical origin and environment, an attitude
described in the previous chapters is historism (and to be
distinguished from historicism), is, to say the least, very one-sided;
and how much this method is liable to produce irrationalism can be
seen from Toynbee’s neglect of, if not contempt for, that important
realm of human life which we have here described as rational.
In an assessment of Marx’s influence, Toynbee arrives at the
conclusion49 that ‘the verdict of History may turn out to be that a
re-awakening of the Christian social conscience has been the one
great positive achievement of Karl Marx’. Against this assessment,
I have certainly not much to say; perhaps the reader will remember
that I too have emphasized50 Marx’s moral influence upon
Christianity. I do not think that, as a final appraisal, Toynbee takes
sufficiently into account the great moral idea that the exploited
should emancipate themselves, instead of waiting for acts of
charity on the part of the exploiters; but this, of course, is just a
difference of opinion, and I would not dream of contesting
Toynbee’s right to his own opinion, which I consider very fair. But
I should like to draw attention to the phrase ‘the verdict of history
may turn out’, with its implied historicist moral theory, and even
moral futurism51. For I hold that we cannot and must not evade
deciding in such matters for ourselves; and that if we are not able
to pass a verdict, neither will history.
So much about Toynbee’s treatment of Marx. Concerning the
more general problem of his historism or historical relativism, it
may be said that he is well aware of it, although he does not
formulate it as a general principle of the historical determination of
all thought, but only as a restricted principle applicable to
historical thought; for he explains52 that he takes ‘as the starting
point .. the axiom that all historical thought is inevitably relative to
the particular circumstances of the thinker’s own time and place.
This is a law of Human Nature from which no human genius can

be exempt.’ The analogy of this historism with the sociology of
knowledge is rather obvious; for ‘the thinker’s own time and place’
is clearly nothing but the description of what may be called his
‘historical habitat’, by analogy with the ‘social habitat’ described
by the sociology of knowledge. The difference, if any, is that
Toynbee confines his ‘law of Human Nature’ to historical thought,
which seems to me a slightly strange and perhaps even
unintentional restriction; for it is somewhat improbable that there
should be a ‘law of Human Nature from which no human genius
can be exempt’ holding not for thought in general but only for
historical thought.
With the undeniable but rather trivial kernel of truth contained
in such a historism or sociologism I have dealt in the last two
chapters, and I need not repeat what I have said there. But as
regards criticism, it may be worth while to point out that
Toynbee’s sentence, if freed from its restriction to historical
thought, could hardly be considered an ‘axiom’ since it would be
paradoxical. (It would be another53 form of the paradox of the liar;
for if no genius is exempt from expressing the fashions of his
social habitat then this contention itself may be merely an
expression of the fashion of its author’s social habitat, i.e. of the
relativistic fashion of our own day.) This remark has not only a
formal-logical significance. For it indicates that historism or
historic-analysis can be applied to historism itself, and this is
indeed a permissible way of dealing with an idea after it has been
criticized by way of rational argument. Since historism has been so
criticized, I may now risk a historic-analytical diagnosis, and say
that historism is a typical though slightly obsolescent product of
our time; or more precisely, of the typical backwardness of the
social sciences of our time. It is the typical reaction to
interventionism and to a period of rationalization and industrial cooperation; a period which, perhaps more than any other in history,
demands the practical application of rational methods to social
problems. A social science which cannot quite meet these demands
is therefore inclined to defend itself by producing elaborate attacks
upon the applicability of science to such problems. Summing up
my historio-analytical diagnosis, I venture to suggest that
Toynbee’s historism is an apologetic anti-rationalism, born out of
despair of reason, and trying to escape into the past, as well as into
prophecy of the future54. If anything then historism must be
understood as an historical product. This diagnosis is corroborated

by many features of Toynbee’s work. An example is his stress
upon the superiority of other-worldliness over action which will
influence the course of this world. So he speaks, for instance, of
Mohammed’s ‘tragic worldly success’ , saying that the opportunity
which offered itself to the prophet of taking action in this world
was ‘a challenge to which his spirit failed to rise. In accepting .. he
was renouncing the sublime role of the nobly-honoured prophet
and contenting himself with the commonplace role of the
magnificently successful statesman.’ (In other words, Mohammed
succumbed to a temptation which Jesus resisted.) Ignatius Loyola,
accordingly, wins Toynbee’s approval for turning from a soldier
into a saint55. One may ask, however, whether this saint did not
become a successful statesman too? (But if it is a question of
Jesuitism, then, it seems, all is different : this form of
statesmanship is sufficiently other-worldly.) In order to avoid
misunderstandings, I wish to make it clear that I myself would rate
many saints higher than most, or very nearly all, statesmen I know
of, for I am generally not impressed by political success. I quote
this passage only as a corroboration of my historio-analytical
diagnosis : that this historism of a modern historical prophet is a
philosophy of escape.
Toynbee’s anti-rationalism is prominent in many other places.
For instance, in an attack upon the rationalistic conception of
tolerance he uses categories like ‘nobleness’ as opposed to
‘lowness’ instead of arguments. The passage deals with the
opposition between the merely ‘negative’ avoidance of violence,
on rational grounds, and the true non-violence of otherworldliness, hinting that these two are instances of ‘meanings ..
which are .. positively antithetical to one another’56. Here is the
passage I have in mind : ‘At its lowest the practice of NonViolence may express nothing more noble and more constructive
than a cynical disillusionment with .. violence .. previously
practised ad nauseam ... A notorious example of Non-Violence of
this unedifying kind is the religious tolerance in the Western World
from the seventeenth century .. down to our day.’ It is difficult to
resist the temptation to retaliate by asking—using Toynbee’s own
terminology—whether this edifying attack upon Western
democratic religious tolerance expresses anything more noble or
more constructive than a cynical disillusionment with reason;
whether it is not a notorious example of that anti-rationalism which
has been, and unfortunately still is, fashionable in our Western

World, and which has been practised ad nauseam, especially from
the time of Hegel, down to our day?
Of course, my historio-analysis of Toynbee is not a serious
criticism. It is only an unkind way of retaliating, of paying
historism back in its own coin. My fundamental criticism is on
very different lines, and I should certainly be sorry if by dabbling
in historism I were to become responsible for making this cheap
method more fashionable than it is already.
I do not wish to be misunderstood. I feel no hostility towards
religious mysticism (only towards a militant anti-rationalist
intellectualism) and I should be the first to fight any attempt to
oppress it. It is not I who advocate religious intolerance. But I
claim that faith in reason, or rationalism, or humanitarianism, or
humanism, has the same right as any other creed to contribute to an
improvement of human affairs, and especially to the control of
international crime and the establishment of peace. ‘The humanist’,
Toynbee writes57, ‘purposely concentrates all his attention and
effort upon .. bringing human affairs under human control. Yet ..
the unity of mankind can never be established in fact except within
a framework of the unity of the superhuman whole of which
Humanity is a part ..; and our Modern Western school of humanists
have been peculiar, as well as perverse, in planning to reach
Heaven by raising a titanic Tower of Babel on terrestrial
foundations ..’ Toynbee’s contention, if I understand him rightly, is
that there is no chance for the humanist to bring international
affairs under the control of human reason. Appealing to the
authority of Bergson58, he claims that only allegiance to a
superhuman whole can save us, and that there is no way for human
reason, no ‘terrestrial road’, as he puts it, by which tribal
nationalism can be superseded. Now I do not mind the
characterization of the humanist’s faith in reason as ‘terrestrial’,
since I believe that it is indeed a principle of rationalist politics that
we cannot make heaven on earth59. But humanism is, after all, a
faith which has proved itself in deeds, and which has proved itself
as well, perhaps, as any other creed. And although I think, with
most humanists, that Christianity, by teaching the fatherhood of
God, may make a great contribution to establishing the
brotherhood of man, I also think that those who undermine man’s
faith in reason are unlikely to contribute much to this end.

Conclusion
Chapter 25: Has History Any Meaning?
I
In approaching the end of this book, I wish again to remind the
reader that these chapters were not intended as anything like a full
history of historicism; they are merely scattered marginal notes to
such a history, and rather personal notes to boot. That they form,
besides, a kind of critical introduction to the philosophy of society
and of politics, is closely connected with this character of theirs,
for historicism is a social and political and moral (or, shall I say,
immoral) philosophy, and it has been as such most influential since
the beginning of our civilization. It is therefore hardly possible to
comment on its history without discussing the fundamental
problems of society, of politics, and of morals. But such a
discussion, whether it admits it or not, must always contain a
strong personal element. This does not mean that much in this
book is purely a matter of opinion; in the few cases where I am
explaining my personal proposals or decisions in moral and
political matters, I have always made the personal character of the
proposal or decision clear. It rather means that the selection of the
subject matter treated is a matter of personal choice to a much
greater extent than it would be, say, in a scientific treatise.
In a way, however, this difference is a matter of degree. Even a
science is not merely a ‘body of facts’. It is, at the very least, a
collection, and as such it is dependent upon the collector’s
interests, upon a point of view. In science, this point of view is
usually determined by a scientific theory; that is to say, we select
from the infinite variety of facts, and from the infinite variety of
aspects of facts, those facts and those aspects which are interesting
because they are connected with some more or less preconceived
scientific theory. A certain school of philosophers of scientific
method1 have concluded from considerations such as these that
science always argues in a circle, and ‘that we find ourselves
chasing our own tails’, as Eddington puts it, since we can only get
out of our factual experience what we have ourselves put into it, in
the form of our theories. But this is not a tenable argument.
Although it is, in general, quite true that we select only facts which
have a bearing upon some preconceived theory, it is not true that
we select only such facts as confirm the theory and, as it were,

repeat it; the method of science is rather to look out for facts which
may refute the theory. This is what we call testing a theory—to see
whether we cannot find a flaw in it. But although the facts are
collected with an eye upon the theory, and will confirm it as long
as the theory stands up to these tests, they are more than merely a
kind of empty repetition of a preconceived theory. They confirm
the theory only if they are the results of unsuccessful attempts to
overthrow its predictions, and therefore a telling testimony in its
favour. So it is, I hold, the possibility of overthrowing it, or its
falsifiability, that constitutes the possibility of testing it, and
therefore the scientific character of a theory; and the fact that all
tests of a theory are attempted falsifications of predictions derived
with its help, furnishes the clue to scientific method2. This view of
scientific method is corroborated by the history of science, which
shows that scientific theories are often overthrown by experiments,
and that the overthrow of theories is indeed the vehicle of scientific
progress. The contention that science is circular cannot be upheld.
But one element of this contention remains true; namely, that
all scientific descriptions of facts are highly selective, that they
always depend upon theories. The situation can be best described
by comparison with a searchlight (the ‘searchlight theory of
science’, as I usually call it in contradistinction to the ‘bucket
theory of the mind’3). What the searchlight makes visible will
depend upon its position, upon our way of directing it, and upon its
intensity, colour, etc.; although it will, of course, also depend very
largely upon the things illuminated by it. Similarly, a scientific
description will depend, largely, upon our point of view, our
interests, which are as a rule connected with the theory or
hypothesis we wish to test; although it will also depend upon the
facts described. Indeed, the theory or hypothesis could be
described as the crystallization of a point of view. For if we
attempt to formulate our point of view, then this formulation will,
as a rule, be what one sometimes calls a working hypothesis; that
is to say, a provisional assumption whose function is to help us to
select, and to order, the facts. But we should be clear that there
cannot be any theory or hypothesis which is not, in this sense, a
working hypothesis, and does not remain one. For no theory is
final, and every theory helps us to select and order facts. This
selective character of all description makes it in a certain sense
‘relative’; but only in the sense that we would offer not this but
another description, if our point of view were different. It may also

affect our belief in the truth of the description; but it does not affect
the question of the truth or falsity of the description; truth is not
‘relative’ in this sense4.
The reason why all description is selective is, roughly
speaking, the infinite wealth and variety of the possible aspects of
the facts of our world. In order to describe this infinite wealth, we
have at our disposal only a finite number of finite series of words.
Thus we may describe as long as we like : our description will
always be incomplete, a mere selection, and a small one at that, of
the facts which present themselves for description. This shows that
it is not only impossible to avoid a selective point of view, but also
wholly undesirable to attempt to do so; for if we could do so, we
should get not a more ‘objective’ description, but only a mere heap
of entirely unconnected statements. But, of course, a point of view
is inevitable; and the naive attempt to avoid it can only lead to selfdeception, and to the uncritical application of an unconscious point
of view5. All this is true, most emphatically, in the case of
historical description, with its ‘infinite subject matter’, as
Schopenhauer6 calls it. Thus in history no less than in science, we
cannot avoid a point of view; and the belief that we can must lead
to self-deception and to lack of critical care. This does not mean, of
course, that we are permitted to falsify anything, or to take matters
of truth lightly. Any particular historical description of facts will
be simply true or false, however difficult it may be to decide upon
its truth or falsity.
So far, the position of history is analogous to that of the natural
sciences, for example, that of physics. But if we compare the part
played by a ‘point of view ‘in history with that played by a ‘point
of view’ in physics, then we find a great difference. In physics, as
we have seen, the ‘point of view’ is usually presented by a physical
theory which can be tested by searching for new facts. In history,
the matter is not quite so simple.
II
Let us first consider a little more closely the role of the theories
in a natural science such as physics. Here, theories have several
connected tasks. They help to unify science, and they help to
explain as well as to predict events. Regarding explanation and
prediction, I may perhaps quote from one of my own publications7:
‘To give a causal explanation of a certain event means to derive
deductively a statement (it will be called a prognosis) which

describes that event, using as premises of the deduction some
universal laws together with certain singular or specific sentences
which we may call initial conditions. For example, we can say that
we have given a causal explanation of the breaking of a certain
thread if we find that this thread was capable of carrying one
pound only, and that a weight of two pounds was put on it. If we
analyse this causal explanation, then we find that two different
constituents are involved in it. (1) We assume some hypotheses of
the character of universal laws of nature; in our case, perhaps :
“Whenever a certain thread undergoes a tension exceeding a
certain maximum tension which is characteristic for that particular
thread, then it will break." (2) We assume some specific statements
(the initial conditions) pertaining to the particular event in
question; in our case, we may have the two statements : “For this
thread, the characteristic maximum tension at which it is liable to
break is equal to a one-pound weight” and “The weight put on this
thread was a two-pound weight." Thus we have two different kinds
of statements which together yield a complete causal explanation,
viz. : (1) universal statements of the character of natural laws, and
(2) specific statements pertaining to the special case in question,
the initial conditions. Now from the universal laws (1), we can
deduce with the help of the initial conditions (2) the following
specific statement (3) : “This thread will break." This conclusion
(3) we may also call a specific prognosis.—The initial conditions
(or more precisely, the situation described by them) are usually
spoken of as the cause of the event in question, and the prognosis
(or rather, the event described by the prognosis) as the effect : for
example, we say that the putting of a weight of two pounds on a
thread capable of carrying one pound only was the cause of the
breaking of the thread.’
From this analysis of causal explanation, we can see several
things. One is that we can never speak of cause and effect in an
absolute way, but that an event is a cause of another event, which
is its effect, relative to some universal law. However, these
universal laws are very often so trivial (as in our own example)
that as a rule we take them for granted, instead of making
conscious use of them. A second point is that the use of a theory
for the purpose of predicting some specific event is just another
aspect of its use for the purpose of explaining such an event. And
since we test a theory by comparing the events predicted with
those actually observed, our analysis also shows how theories can

be tested. Whether we use a theory for the purpose of explanation,
or prediction, or of testing, depends on our interest, and on what
propositions we take as given or assumed.
Thus in the case of the so-called theoretical or generalizing
sciences (such as physics, biology, sociology, etc.) we are
predominantly interested in the universal laws or hypotheses. We
wish to know whether they are true, and since we can never
directly make sure of their truth, we adopt the method of
eliminating the false ones. Our interest in the specific events, for
example in experiments which are described by the initial
conditions and prognoses, is somewhat limited; we are interested
in them mainly as means to certain ends, means by which we can
test the universal laws, which latter are considered as interesting in
themselves, and as unifying our knowledge.
In the case of applied sciences, our interest is different. The
engineer who uses physics in order to build a bridge is
predominantly interested in a prognosis : whether or not a bridge
"of a certain kind described (by the initial conditions) will carry a
certain load. For him, the universal laws are means to an end and
taken for granted.
Accordingly, pure and applied generalizing sciences are
respectively interested in testing universal hypotheses, and in
predicting specific events. But there is a further interest, that in
explaining a specific or particular event. If we wish to explain such
an event, for example, a certain road accident, then we usually
tacitly assume a host of rather trivial universal laws (such as that a
bone breaks under a certain strain, or that any motor-car colliding
in a certain way with any human body will exert a strain sufficient
to break a bone, etc.), and are interested, predominantly, in the
initial conditions or in the cause which, together with these trivial
universal laws, would explain the event in question. We then
usually assume certain initial conditions hypothetically, and
attempt to find some further evidence in order to find out whether
or not these hypothetically assumed initial conditions are true; that
is to say, we test these specific hypotheses by deriving from them
(with the help of some other and usually equally trivial universal
laws) new predictions which can be confronted with observable
facts. Very rarely do we find ourselves in the position of having to
worry about the universal laws involved in such an explanation. It
happens only when we observe some new or strange kind of event,
such as an unexpected chemical reaction. If such an event gives

rise to the framing and testing of new hypotheses, then it is
interesting mainly from the point of view of some generalizing
science. But as a rule, if we are interested in specific events and
their explanation, we take for granted all the many universal laws
which we need.
Now the sciences which have this interest in specific events
and in their explanation may, in contradistinction to the
generalizing sciences, be called the historical sciences.
This view of history makes it clear why so many students of
history and its method insist that it is the particular event that
interests them, and not any so-called universal historical laws. For
from our point of view, there can be no historical laws.
Generalization belongs simply to a different line of interest,
sharply to be distinguished from that interest in specific events and
their causal explanation which is the business of history. Those
who are interested in laws must turn to the generalizing sciences
(for example, to sociology). Our view also makes it clear why
history has so often been described as ‘the events of the past as
they actually did happen’. This description brings out quite well
the specific interest of the student of history, as opposed to a
student of a generalizing science, even though we shall have to
raise certain objections against it. And our view explains why, in
history, we are confronted, much more than in the generalizing
sciences, with the problems of its ‘infinite subject matter’. For the
theories or universal laws of generalizing science introduce unity
as well as a ‘point of view’; they create, for every generalizing
science, its problems, and its centres of interest as well as of
research, of logical construction, and of presentation. But in history
we have no such unifying theories; or, rather, the host of trivial
universal laws we use are taken for granted; they are practically
without interest, and totally unable to bring order into the subject
matter. If we explain, for example, the first division of Poland in
1772 by pointing out that it could not possibly resist the combined
power of Russia, Prussia, and Austria, then we are tacitly using
some trivial universal law such as : ‘If of two armies which are
about equally well armed and led, one has a tremendous
superiority in men, then the other never wins.’ (Whether we say
here ‘never’ or ‘hardly ever’ does not make, for our purposes, as
much difference as it does for the Captain of H.M.S. Pinafore.)
Such a law might be described as a law of the sociology of military
power, but it is too trivial ever to raise a serious problem for the

students of sociology, or to arouse their attention. Or if we explain
Caesar’s decision to cross the Rubicon by his ambition and energy
say, then we are using some very trivial psychological
generalizations which would hardly ever arouse the attention of a
psychologist. (As a matter of fact, most historical explanation
makes tacit use, not so much of trivial sociological and
psychological laws, but of what I have called, in chapter 14, the
logic of the situation; that is to say, besides the initial conditions
describing personal interests, aims, and other situational factors,
such as the information available to the person concerned, it tacitly
assumes, as a kind of first approximation, the trivial general law
that sane persons as a rule act more or less rationally.)
III
We see, therefore, that those universal laws which historical
explanation uses provide no selective and unifying principle, no
‘point of view’ for history. In a very limited sense such a point of
view may be provided by confining history to a history of
something; examples are the history of power politics, or of
economic relations, or of technology, or of mathematics. But as a
rule, we need further selective principles, points of view which are
at the same time centres of interest. Some of these are provided by
preconceived ideas which in some way resemble universal laws,
such as the idea that what is important for history is the character
of the ‘Great Men’, or the ‘national character’, or moral ideas, or
economic conditions, etc. Now it is important to see that many
‘historical theories’ (they might perhaps be better described as
‘quasi-theories’) are in their character vastly different from
scientific theories. For in history (including the historical natural
sciences such as historical geology) the facts at our disposal are
often severely limited and cannot be repeated or implemented at
our will. And they have been collected in accordance with a
preconceived point of view; the so-called ‘sources’ of history
record only such facts as appeared sufficiently interesting to
record, so that the sources will often contain only such facts as fit
in with preconceived theory. And if no further facts are available,
it will often not be possible to test this theory or any other
subsequent theory. Such untestable historical theories can then
rightly be charged with being circular in the sense in which this
charge has been unjustly brought against scientific theories. I shall

call such historical theories, in contradistinction to scientific
theories, ‘general interpretations’.
Interpretations are important since they represent a point of
view. But we have seen that a point of view is always inevitable,
and that, in history, a theory which can be tested and which is
therefore of scientific character can only rarely be obtained. Thus
we must not think that a general interpretation can be confirmed by
its agreement even with all our records; for we must remember its
circularity, as well as the fact that there will always be a number of
other (and perhaps incompatible) interpretations that agree with the
same records, and that we can rarely obtain new data able to serve
as do crucial experiments in physics8. Historians often do not see
any other interpretation which fits the facts as well as their own
does; but if we consider that even in the field of physics, with its
larger and more reliable stock of facts, new crucial experiments are
needed again and again because the old ones are all in keeping
with both of two competing and incompatible theories (consider
the eclipse-experiment which is needed for deciding between
Newton’s and Einstein’s theories of gravitation), then we shall give
up the naive belief that any definite set of historical records can
ever be interpreted in one way only.
But this does not mean, of course, that all interpretations are of
equal merit. First, there are always interpretations which are not
really in keeping with the accepted records; secondly, there are
some which need a number of more or less plausible auxiliary
hypotheses if they are to escape falsification by the records; next,
there are some that are unable to connect a number of facts which
another interpretation can connect, and in so far ‘explain’. There
may accordingly be a considerable amount of progress even within
the field of historical interpretation. Furthermore, there may be all
kinds of intermediate stages between more or less universal ‘points
of view’ and those specific or singular historical hypotheses
mentioned above, which in the explanation of historical events
play the role of hypothetical initial conditions rather than of
universal laws. Often enough, these can be tested fairly well and
are therefore comparable to scientific theories. But some of these
specific hypotheses closely resemble those universal quasi-theories
which I have called interpretations, and may accordingly be
classed with these, as ‘specific interpretations’. For the evidence in
favour of such a specific interpretation is often enough just as
circular in character as the evidence in favour of some universal

‘point of view.’ For example, our only authority may give us just
that information regarding certain events which fits with his own
specific interpretation. Most specific interpretations of these facts
we may attempt will then be circular in the sense that they must fit
in with that interpretation which was used in the original selection
of facts. If, however, we can give to such material an interpretation
which radically deviates from that adopted by our authority (and
this is certainly so, for example, in our interpretation of Plato’s
work), then the character of our interpretation may perhaps take on
some semblance to that of a scientific hypothesis. But
fundamentally, it is necessary to keep in mind the fact that it is a
very dubious argument in favour of a certain interpretation that it
can be easily applied, and that it explains all we know; for only if
we can look out for counter examples can we test a theory. (This
point is nearly always overlooked by the admirers of the various
‘unveiling philosophies’, especially by the psycho-, socio-, and
historio-analysts; they are often seduced by the ease with which
their theories can be applied everywhere.)
I said before that interpretations may be incompatible; but as
long as we consider them merely as crystallizations of points of
view, then they are not. For example, the interpretation that man
steadily progresses (towards the open society or some other aim) is
incompatible with the interpretation that he steadily slips back or
retrogresses. But the ‘point of view’ of one who looks on human
history as a history of progress is not necessarily incompatible with
that of one who looks on it as a history of retrogression; that is to
say, we could write a history of human progress towards freedom
(containing, for example, the story of the fight against slavery) and
another history of human retrogression and oppression (containing
perhaps such things as the impact of the white race upon the
coloured races); and these two histories need not be in conflict;
rather, they may be complementary to each other, as would be two
views of the same landscape seen from two different points. This
consideration is of considerable importance. For since each
generation has its own troubles and problems, and therefore its
own interests and its Own point of view, it follows that each
generation has a right to look upon and re-interpret history in its
own way, which is complementary to that of previous generations.
After all, we study history because we are interested in it9, and
perhaps because we wish to learn something about our own
problems. But history can serve neither of these two purposes if,

under the influence of an inapplicable idea of objectivity, we
hesitate to present historical problems from our point of view. And
we should not think that our point of view, if consciously and
critically applied to the problem, will be inferior to that of a writer
who naively believes that he does not interpret, and that he has
reached a level of objectivity permitting him to present ‘the events
of the past as they actually did happen’. (This is why I believe that
even such admittedly personal comments as can be found in this
book are justified, since they are in keeping with historical
method.) The main thing is to be conscious of one’s point of view,
and critical, that is to say, to avoid, as far as this is possible,
unconscious and therefore uncritical bias in the presentation of the
facts. In every other respect, the interpretation must speak for
itself; and its merits will be its fertility, its ability to elucidate the
facts of history, as well as its topical interest, its ability to elucidate
the problems of the day.
To sum up, there can be no history of ‘the past as it actually did
happen’; there can only be historical interpretations, and none of
them final; and every generation has a right to frame its own. But
not only has it a right to frame its own interpretations, it also has a
kind of obligation to do so; for there is indeed a pressing need to be
answered. We want to know how our troubles are related to the
past, and we want to see the line along which we may progress
towards the solution of what we feel, and what we choose, to be
our main tasks. It is this need which, if not answered by rational
and fair means, produces historicist interpretations. Under its
pressure the historicist substitutes for a rational question : ‘What
are we to choose as our most urgent problems, how did they arise,
and along what roads may we proceed to solve them?’ the
irrational and apparently factual question : ‘Which way are we
going? What, in essence, is the part that history has destined us to
play?’
But am I justified in refusing to the historicist the right to
interpret history in his own way? Have I not just proclaimed that
anybody has such a right? My answer to this question is that
historicist interpretations are of a peculiar kind. Those
interpretations which are needed, and justified, and one or other of
which we are bound to adopt, can, I have said, be compared to a
searchlight. We let it play upon our past, and we hope to illuminate
the present by its reflection. As opposed to this the historicist
interpretation may be compared to a searchlight which we direct

upon ourselves. It makes it difficult if not impossible to see
anything of our surroundings, and it paralyses our actions. To
translate this metaphor, the historicist does not recognize that it is
we who select and order the facts of history, but he believes that
‘history itself’, or the ‘history of mankind’, determines, by its
inherent laws, ourselves, our problems, our future, and even our
point of view. Instead of recognizing that historical interpretation
should answer a need arising out of the practical problems and
decisions which face us, the historicist believes that in our desire
for historical interpretation, there expresses itself the profound
intuition that by contemplating history we may discover the secret,
the essence of human destiny. Historicism is out to find The Path
on which mankind is destined to walk; it is out to discover The
Clue to History (as J. Macmurray calls it), or The Meaning of
History.
IV
But is there such a clue? Is there a meaning in history?
I do not wish to enter here into the problem of the meaning of
‘meaning’; I take it for granted that most people know with
sufficient clarity what they mean when they speak of the ‘meaning
of history’ or of the ‘meaning or purpose of life’10. And in this
sense, in the sense in which the question of the meaning of history
is asked, I answer : History has no meaning.
In order to give reasons for this opinion, I must first say
something about that ‘history’ which people have in mind when
they ask whether it has meaning. So far, I have myself spoken
about ‘history’ as if it did not need any explanation. That is no
longer possible; for I wish to make it clear that ‘history’ in the
sense in which most people speak of it simply does not exist; and
this is at least one reason why I say that it has no meaning.
How do most people come to use the term ‘history’? (I mean
‘history’ in the sense in which we say of a book that it is about the
history of Europe—not in the sense in which we say that it is a
history of Europe.) They learn about it in school and at the
University. They read books about it. They see what is treated in
the books under the name ‘history of the world’ or ‘the history of
mankind’, and they get used to looking upon it as a more or less
definite series of facts. And these facts constitute, they believe, the
history of mankind. But we have already seen that the realm of
facts is infinitely rich, and that there must be selection. According

to our interests, we could, for instance, write about the history of
art; or of language; or of feeding habits; or of typhus fever (see
Zinsser’s Rats, Lice, and History). Certainly, none of these is the
history of mankind (nor all of them taken together). What people
have in mind when they speak of the history of mankind is, rather,
the history of the Egyptian, Babylonian, Persian, Macedonian, and
Roman empires, and so on, down to our own day. In other words :
They speak about the history of mankind, but what they mean, and
what they have learned about in school, is the history of political
power.
There is no history of mankind, there is only an indefinite
number of histories of all kinds of aspects of human life. And one
of these is the history of political power. This is elevated into the
history of the world. But this, I hold, is an offence against every
decent conception of mankind. It is hardly better than to treat the
history of embezzlement or of robbery or of poisoning as the
history of mankind. For the history of power politics is nothing but
the history of international crime and mass murder (including, it is
true, some of the attempts to suppress them). This history is taught
in schools, and some of the greatest criminals are extolled as its
heroes.
But is there really no such thing as a universal history in the
sense of a concrete history of mankind? There can be none. This
must be the reply of every humanitarian, I believe, and especially
that of every Christian. A concrete history of mankind, if there
were any, would have to be the history of all men. It would have to
be the history of all human hopes, struggles, and sufferings. For
there is no one man more important than any other. Clearly, this
concrete history cannot be written. We must make abstractions, we
must neglect, select. But with this we arrive at the many histories;
and among them, at that history of international crime and mass
murder which has been advertised as the history of mankind.
But why has just the history of power been selected, and not,
for example, that of religion, or of poetry? There are several
reasons. One is that power affects us all, and poetry only a few.
Another is that men are inclined to worship power. But there can
be no doubt that the worship of power is one of the worst kinds of
human idolatries, a relic of the time of the cage, of human
servitude. The worship of power is born of fear, an emotion which
is rightly despised. A third reason why power politics has been
made the core of ‘history’ is that those in power wanted to be

worshipped and could enforce their wishes. Many historians wrote
under the supervision of the emperors, the generals and the
dictators.
I know that these views will meet with the strongest opposition
from many sides, including some apologists for Christianity; for
although there is hardly anything in the New Testament to support
this doctrine, it is often considered a part of the Christian dogma
that God reveals Himself in history; that history has meaning; and
that its meaning is the purpose of God. Historicism is thus held to
be a necessary element of religion. But I do not admit this. I
contend that this view is pure idolatry and superstition, not only
from the point of view of a rationalist or humanist but from the
Christian point of view itself.
What is behind this theistic historicism? With Hegel, it looks
upon history—political history—as a stage, or rather, as a kind of
lengthy Shakespearian play; and the audience conceive either the
‘great historical personalities’, or mankind in the abstract, as the
heroes of the play. Then they ask, ‘Who has written this play?’
And they think that they give a pious answer when they reply,
‘God’. But they are mistaken. Their answer is pure blasphemy, for
the play was (and they know it) written not by God, but, under the
supervision of generals and dictators, by the professors of history.
I do not deny that it is as justifiable to interpret history from a
Christian point of view as it is to interpret it from any other point
of view; and it should certainly be emphasized, for example, how
much of our Western aims and ends, humanitarianism, freedom,
equality, we owe to the influence of Christianity. But at the same
time, the only rational as well as the only Christian attitude even
towards the history of freedom is that we are ourselves responsible
for it, in the same sense in which we are responsible for what we
make of our lives, and that only our conscience can judge us and
not our worldly success. The theory that God reveals Himself and
His judgement in history is indistinguishable from the theory that
worldly success is the ultimate judge and justification of our
actions; it comes to the same thing as the doctrine that history will
judge, that is to say, that future might is right; it is the same as
what I have called ‘moral futurism’11. To maintain that God
reveals Himself in what is usually called ‘history’, in the history of
international crime and of mass murder, is indeed blasphemy; for
what really happens within the realm of human lives is hardly ever
touched upon by this cruel and at the same time childish affair. The

life of the forgotten, of the unknown individual man; his sorrows
and his joys, his suffering and death, this is the real content of
human experience down the ages. If that could be told by history,
then I should certainly not say that it is blasphemy to see the finger
of God in it. But such a history does not and cannot exist; and all
the history which exists, our history of the Great and the Powerful,
is at best a shallow comedy; it is the opera buffa played by the
powers behind reality (comparable to Homer’s opera buffa of the
Olympian powers behind the scene of human struggles). It is what
one of our worst instincts, the idolatrous worship of power, of
success, has led us to believe to be real. And in this not even manmade, but man-faked ‘history’, some Christians dare to see the
hand of God! They dare to understand and to know what He wills
when they impute to Him their petty historical interpretations! ‘On
the contrary’, says K. Barth, the theologian, in his Credo, ‘we have
to begin with the admission .. that all that we think we know when
we say “God” does not reach or comprehend Him .. , but always
one of our self-conceived and self-made idols, whether it is “spirit”
or “nature ", “fate” or “idea” ..’12 (It is in keeping with this attitude
that Barth characterizes the ‘Neo-Protestant doctrine of the
revelation of God in history’ as ‘inadmissible’ and as an
encroachment upon ‘the kingly office of Christ’.) But it is, from
the Christian point of view, not only arrogance that underlies such
attempts; it is, more specifically, an anti-Christian attitude. For
Christianity teaches, if anything, that worldly success is not
decisive. Christ ‘suffered under Pontius Pilate’. I am quoting Barth
again : ‘How does Pontius Pilate get into the Credo? The simple
answer can at once be given : it is a matter of date.’ Thus the man
who was successful, who represented the historical power of that
time, plays here the purely technical role of indicating when these
events happened. And what were these events? They had nothing
to do with power-political success, with ‘history’. They were not
even the story of an unsuccessful non-violent nationalist revolution
(a la Gandhi) of the Jewish people against the Roman conquerors.
The events were nothing but the sufferings of a man. Barth insists
that the word ‘suffers’ refers to the whole of the life of Christ and
not only to His death; he says13 : ‘Jesus suffers. Therefore He does
not conquer. He does not triumph. He has no success .. He
achieved nothing except .. His crucifixion. The same could be said
of His relationship to His people and to His disciples.’ My
intention in quoting Barth is to show that it is not only my

‘rationalist’ or ‘humanist’ point of view from which the worship of
historical success appears as incompatible with the spirit of
Christianity. What matters to Christianity is not the historical deeds
of the powerful Roman conquerers but (to use a phrase of
Kierkegaard’s14) ‘what a few fishermen have given the world’.
And yet all theistic interpretation of history attempts to see in
history as it is recorded, i.e. in the history of power, and in
historical success, the manifestation of God’s will.
To this attack upon the ‘doctrine of the revelation of God in
history’, it will probably be replied that it is success, His success
after His death, by which Christ’s unsuccessful life on earth was
finally revealed to mankind as the greatest spiritual victory; that it
was the success, the fruits of His teaching which proved it and
justified it, and by which the prophecy ‘The last shall be first and
the first last’ has been verified. In other words, that it was the
historical success of the Christian Church through which the will
of God manifested itself. But this is a most dangerous line of
defence. Its implication that the worldly success of the Church is
an argument in favour of Christianity clearly reveals lack of faith.
The early Christians had no worldly encouragement of this kind.
(They believed that conscience must judge power15, and not the
other way round.) Those who hold that the history of the success of
Christian teaching reveals the will of God should ask themselves
whether this success was really a success of the spirit of
Christianity; and whether this spirit did not triumph at the time
when the Church was persecuted, rather than at the time when the
Church was triumphant. Which Church incorporated this spirit
more purely, that of the martyrs, or the victorious Church of the
Inquisition?
There seem to be many who would admit much of this,
insisting as they do that the message of Christianity is to the meek,
but who still believe that this message is one of historicism. An
outstanding representative of this view is J. Macmurray, who, in
The Clue to History, finds the essence of Christian teaching in
historical prophecy, and who sees in its founder the discoverer of a
dialectical law of human nature’. Macmurray holds16 that,
according to this law, political history must inevitably bring forth
‘the socialist commonwealth of the world. The fundamental law of
human nature cannot be broken . . It is the meek who will inherit
the earth.’ But this historicism, with its substitution of certainty for
hope, must lead to a moral futurism. ‘The law cannot be broken.’

So we can be sure, on psychological grounds, that whatever we do
will lead to the same result; that even fascism must, in the end,
lead to that commonwealth; so that the final outcome does not
depend upon our moral decision, and that there is no need to worry
over our responsibilities. If we are told that we can be certain, on
scientific grounds, that ‘the last will be first and the first last’, what
else is this but the substitution of historical prophecy for
conscience? Does not this theory come dangerously close
(certainly against the intentions of its author) to the admonition :
‘Be wise, and take to heart what the founder of Christianity tells
you, for he was a great psychologist of human nature and a great
prophet of history. Climb in time upon the band-waggon of the
meek; for according to the inexorable scientific laws of human
nature, this is the surest way to come out on top!’ Such a clue to
history implies the worship of success; it implies that the meek will
be justified because they will be on the winning side. It translates
Marxism, and especially what I have described as Marx’s
historicist moral theory, into the language of a psychology of
human nature, and of religious prophecy. It is an interpretation
which, by implication, sees the greatest achievement of
Christianity in the fact that its founder was a forerunner of Hegel—
a superior one, admittedly. My insistence that success should not
be worshipped, that it cannot be our judge, and that we should not
be dazzled by it, and in particular, my attempts to show that in this
attitude I concur with what I believe to be the true teaching of
Christianity, should not be misunderstood. They are not intended
to support the attitude of ‘other-worldliness’ which I have
criticized in the last chapter17. Whether Christianity is otherworldly, I do not know, but it certainly teaches that the only way to
prove one’s faith is by rendering practical (and worldly) help to
those who need it. And it is certainly possible to combine an
attitude of the utmost reserve and even of contempt towards
worldly success in the sense of power, glory, and wealth, with the
attempt to do one’s best in this world, and to further the ends one
has decided to adopt with the clear purpose of making them
succeed; not for the sake of success or of one’s justification by
history, but for their own sake.
A forceful support of some of these views, and especially of
the incompatibility of historicism and Christianity, can be found in
Kierkegaard’s criticism of Hegel. Although Kierkegaard never
freed himself entirely from the Hegelian tradition in which he was

educated18, there was hardly anybody who recognized more clearly
what Hegelian historicism meant. ‘There were’, Kierkegaard
wrote19, ‘philosophers who tried, before Hegel, to explain ..
history. And providence could only smile when it saw these
attempts. But providence did not laugh outright, for there was a
human, honest sincerity about them. But Hegel—! Here I need
Homer’s language. How did the gods roar with laughter! Such a
horrid little professor who has simply seen through the necessity of
anything and everything there is, and who now plays the whole
affair on his barrel-organ : listen, ye gods of Olympus!’ And
Kierkegaard continues, referring to the attack20 by the atheist
Schopenhauer upon the Christian apologist Hegel : ‘Reading
Schopenhauer has given me more pleasure than I can express.
What he says is perfectly true; and then—it serves the Germans
right—he is as rude as only a German can be.’ But Kierkegaard’s
own expressions are nearly as blunt as Schopenhauer’s; for
Kierkegaard goes on to say that Hegelianism, which he calls ‘this
brilliant spirit of putridity’, is the ‘most repugnant of all forms of
looseness’; and he speaks of its ‘mildew of pomposity’, its
‘intellectual voluptuousness’, and its ‘infamous splendour of
corruption’.
And, indeed, our intellectual as well as our ethical education is
corrupt. It is perverted by the admiration of brilliance, of the way
things are said, which takes the place of a critical appreciation of
the things that are said (and the things that are done). It is perverted
by the romantic idea of the splendour of the stage of History on
which we are the actors. We are educated to act with an eye to the
gallery.
The whole problem of educating man to a sane appreciation of
his own importance relative to that of other individuals is
thoroughly muddled by these ethics of fame and fate, by a morality
which perpetuates an educational system that is still based upon the
classics with their romantic view of the history of power and their
romantic tribal morality which goes back to Heraclitus; a system
whose ultimate basis is the worship of power. Instead of a sober
combination of individualism and altruism (to use these labels
again21)—that is to say, instead of a position like ‘What really
matters are human individuals, but I do not take this to mean that it
is I who matter very much’—a romantic combination of egoism
and collectivism is taken for granted. That is to say, the importance
of the self, of its emotional life and its ‘self-expression’, is

romantically exaggerated; and with it, the tension between the
‘personality’ and the group, the collective. This takes the place of
the other individuals, the other men, but does not admit of
reasonable personal relations. ‘Dominate or submit’ is, by
implication, the device of this attitude; either be a Great Man, a
Hero wrestling with fate and earning fame (‘ the greater the fall,
the greater the fame’, says Heraclitus), or belong to ‘the masses’
and submit yourself to leadership and sacrifice yourself to the
higher cause of your collective. There is a neurotic, an hysterical
element in this exaggerated stress on the importance of the tension
between the self and the collective, and I do not doubt that this
hysteria, this reaction to the strain of civilization, is the secret of
the strong emotional appeal of the ethics of hero-worship, of the
ethics of domination and submission22.
At the bottom of all this there is a real difficulty. While it is
fairly clear (as we have seen in chapters 9 and 24) that the
politician should limit himself to fighting against evils, instead of
fighting for ‘positive’ or ‘higher’ values, such as happiness, etc.,
the teacher, in principle, is in a different position. Although he
should not impose his scale of ‘higher’ values upon his pupils, he
certainly should try to stimulate their interest in these values. He
should care for the souls of his pupils. (When Socrates told his
friends to care for their souls, he cared for them.) Thus there is
certainly something like a romantic or aesthetic element in
education, such as should not enter politics. But though this is true
in principle, it is hardly applicable to our educational system. For it
presupposes a relation of friendship between teacher and pupil, a
relation which, as emphasized in chapter 24, each party must be
free to end. (Socrates chose his companions, and they him.) The
very number of pupils makes all this impossible in our schools.
Accordingly, attempts to impose higher values not only become
unsuccessful, but it must be insisted that they lead to harm—to
something much more concrete and public than the ideals aimed at.
And the principle that those who are entrusted to us must, before
anything else, not be harmed, should be recognized to be just as
fundamental for education as it is for medicine. ‘Do no harm’ (and,
therefore, ‘give the young what they most urgently need, in order
to become independent of us, and to be able to choose for
themselves’) would be a very worthy aim for our educational
system, and one whose realization is somewhat remote, even
though it sounds modest. Instead ‘higher’ aims are the fashion,

aims which are typically romantic and indeed nonsensical, such as
‘the full development of the personality’.
It is under the influence of such romantic ideas that
individualism is still identified with egoism, as it was by Plato, and
altruism with collectivism (i.e. with the substitution of group
egoism for the individualist egoism). But this bars the way even to
a clear formulation of the main problem, the problem of how to
obtain a sane appreciation of one’s own importance in relation to
other individuals. Since it is felt, and rightly so, that we have to
aim at something beyond our own selves, something to which we
can devote ourselves, and for which we may make sacrifices, it is
concluded that this must be the collective, with its ‘historical
mission’. Thus we are told to make sacrifices, and, at the same
time, assured that we shall make an excellent bargain by doing so.
We shall make sacrifices, it is said, but we shall thereby obtain
honour and fame. We shall become ‘leading actors’, heroes on the
Stage of History; for a small risk we shall gain great rewards. This
is the dubious morality of a period in which only a tiny minority
counted, and in which nobody cared for the common people. It is
the morality of those who, being political or intellectual aristocrats,
have a chance of getting into the textbooks of history. It cannot
possibly be the morality of those who favour justice and
equalitarianism; for historical fame cannot be just, and it can be
attained only by a very few. The countless number of men who are
just as worthy, or worthier, will always be forgotten.
It should perhaps be admitted that the Heraclitean ethics, the
doctrine that the higher reward is that which only posterity can
offer, may in some way perhaps be slightly superior to an ethical
doctrine which teaches us to look out for reward now. But it is not
what we need. We need an ethics which defies success and reward.
And such an ethics need not be invented. It is not new. It has been
taught by Christianity, at least in its beginnings. It is, again, taught
by the industrial as well as by the scientific co-operation of our
own day. The romantic historicist morality of fame, fortunately,
seems to be on the decline. The Unknown Soldier shows it. We are
beginning to realize that sacrifice may mean just as much, or even
more, when it is made anonymously. Our ethical education must
follow suit. We must be taught to do our work; to make our
sacrifice for the sake of this work, and not for praise or the
avoidance of blame. (The fact that we all need some
encouragement, hope, praise, and even blame, is another matter

altogether.) We must find our justification in our work, in what we
are doing ourselves, and not in a fictitious ‘meaning of history’.
History has no meaning, I contend. But this contention does not
imply that all we can do about it is to look aghast at the history of
political power, or that we must look on it as a cruel joke. For we
can interpret it, with an eye to those problems of power politics
whose solution we choose to attempt in our time. We can interpret
the history of power politics from the point of view of our fight for
the open society, for a rule of reason, for justice, freedom, equality,
and for the control of international crime. Although history has no
ends, we can impose these ends of ours upon it; and although
history has no meaning, we can give it a meaning.
It is the problem of nature and convention which we meet here
again23. Neither nature nor history can tell us what we ought to do.
Facts, whether those of nature or those of history, cannot make the
decision for us, they cannot determine the ends we are going to
choose. It is we who introduce purpose and meaning into nature
and into history. Men are not equal; but we can decide to fight for
equal rights. Human institutions such as the state are not rational,
but we can decide to fight to make them more rational. We
ourselves and our ordinary language are, on the whole, emotional
rather than rational; but we can try to become a little more rational,
and we can train ourselves to use our language as an instrument not
of self-expression (as our romantic educationists would say) but of
rational communication24. History itself—I mean the history of
power politics, of course, not the non-existent story of the
development of mankind—has no end nor meaning, but we can
decide to give it both. We can make it our fight for the open
society and against its enemies (who, when in a corner, always
protest their humanitarian sentiments, in accordance with Pareto’s
advice); and we can interpret it accordingly. Ultimately, we may
say the same about the ‘meaning of life’. It is up to us to decide
what shall be our purpose in life, to determine our ends25.
This dualism of facts and decisions26 is, I believe, fundamental.
Facts as such have no meaning; they can gain it only through our
decisions. Historicism is only one of many attempts to get over this
dualism; it is born of fear, for it shrinks from realizing that we bear
the ultimate responsibility even for the standards we choose. But
such an attempt seems to me to represent precisely what is usually
described as superstition. For it assumes that we can reap where we
have not sown; it tries to persuade us that if we merely fall into

step with history everything will and must go right, and that no
fundamental decision on our part is required; it tries to shift our
responsibility on to history, and thereby on to the play of demoniac
powers beyond ourselves; it tries to base our actions upon the
hidden intentions of these powers, which can be revealed to us
only in mystical inspirations and intuitions; and it thus puts our
actions and ourselves on the moral level of a man who, inspired by
horoscopes and dreams, chooses his lucky number in a lottery27.
Like gambling, historicism is born of our despair in the rationality
and responsibility of our actions. It is a debased hope and a
debased faith, an attempt to replace the hope and the faith that
springs from our moral enthusiasm and the contempt for success
by a certainty that springs from a pseudo-science; a pseudo-science
of the stars, or of ‘human nature’, or of historical destiny.
Historicism, I assert, is not only rationally untenable, it is also
in conflict with any religion that teaches the importance of
conscience. For such a religion must agree with the rationalist
attitude towards history in its emphasis on our supreme
responsibility for our actions, and for their repercussions upon the
course of history. True, we need hope; to act, to live without hope
goes beyond our strength. But we do not need more, and we must
not be given more. We do not need certainty. Religion, in
particular, should not be a substitute for dreams and wishfulfilment; it should resemble neither the holding of a ticket in a
lottery, nor the holding of a policy in an insurance company. The
historicist element in religion is an element of idolatry, of
superstition.
This emphasis upon the dualism of facts and decisions
determines also our attitude towards such ideas as ‘progress’. If we
think that history progresses, or that we are bound to progress, then
we commit the same mistake as those who believe that history has
a meaning that can be discovered in it and need not be given to it.
For to progress is to move towards some kind of end, towards an
end which exists for us as human beings.
‘History’ cannot do that; only we, the human individuals, can
do it; we can do it by defending and strengthening those
democratic institutions upon which freedom, and with it progress,
depends. And we shall do it much better as we become more fully
aware of the fact that progress rests with us, with our watchfulness,
with our efforts, with the clarity of our conception of our ends, and
with the realism28 of their choice.

Instead of posing as prophets we must become the makers of
our fate. We must learn to do things as well as we can, and to look
out for our mistakes. And when we have dropped the idea that the
history of power will be our judge, when we have given up
worrying whether or not history will justify us, then one day
perhaps we may succeed in getting power under control. In this
way we may even justify history, in our turn. It badly needs a
justification.

Notes
GENERAL REMARKS. The text of the book is self-contained and may be read
without these Notes. However, a considerable amount of material which is likely
to interest all readers of the book will be found here, as well as some references
and controversies which may not be of general interest. Readers who wish to
consult the notes for the sake of this material may find it convenient first to read
without interruption through the text of a chapter, and then to turn to the Notes.
I wish to apologize for the perhaps excessive number of cross references
which have been included for the benefit of those readers who take a special
interest in one or other of the side issues touched upon (such as Plato’s
preoccupation with racialism, or the Socratic Problem). Knowing that war
conditions would make it impossible for me to read the proofs, I decided to refer
not to pages but to note numbers. Accordingly, references to the text have been
indicated by notes such as: ‘cp. text to note 24 to chapter 3’, etc. War conditions
also restricted library facilities, making it impossible for me to obtain a number
of books, some recent and some not, which would have been consulted in
normal circumstances.
* Notes which make use of material which was not available to me when
writing the manuscript for the first edition of this book (and other notes which I
wish to characterize as having been added to the book since 1943) are enclosed
by asterisks; not all new additions to the notes have, however, been so marked.*

Note To The Introduction
For Kant’s motto, see note 41 to chapter 24, and text.
The terms ‘open society’ and ‘closed society’ were first used, to my
knowledge, by Henri Bergson, in Two Sources of Morality and Religion (Engl.
ed., 1935). In spite of a considerable difference (due to a fundamentally different
approach to nearly every problem of philosophy) between Bergson’s way of
using these terms and mine, there is a certain similarity also, which I wish to
acknowledge. (Cp. Bergson’s characterization of the closed society, op. cit., p.
229, as ‘human society fresh from the hands of nature’.) The main difference,
however, is this. My terms indicate, as it were, a rationalist distinction; the
closed society is characterized by the belief in magical taboos, while the open
society is one in which men have learned to be to some extent critical of taboos,
and to base decisions on the authority of their own intelligence (after
discussion). Bergson, on the other hand, has a kind of religious distinction in
mind. This explains why he can look upon his open society as the product of a

mystical intuition, while I suggest (in chapters 10 and 24) that mysticism may be
interpreted as an expression of the longing for the lost unity of the closed
society, and therefore as a reaction against the rationalism of the open society.
From the way my term ‘The Open Society’ is used in chapter 10, it may be seen
that there is some resemblance to Graham Wallas’ term ‘The Great Society’; but
my term may cover a ‘small society’ too, as it were, like that of Periclean
Athens, while it is perhaps conceivable that a ‘Great Society’ may be arrested
and thereby closed. There is also, perhaps, a similarity between my ‘open
society’ and the term used by Walter Lippmann as the title of his most admirable
book, The Good Society (1937). See also notes 59 (2) to chapter 10 and notes 29,
32, and 58 to chapter 24, and text.

Notes To Chapter 1
For Pericles’ motto, see note 31 to chapter 10, and text. Plato’s motto is
discussed in some detail in notes 33 and 34 to chapter 6, and text.
1
I use the term ‘collectivism’ only for a doctrine which emphasizes the
significance of some collective or group, for instance, ‘the state’ (or a certain
state; or a nation; or a class) as against that of the individual. The problem of
collectivism versus individualism is explained more fully in chapter 6, below;
see especially notes 26 to 28 to that chapter, and text.—Concerning ‘tribalism’,
cp. chapter 10, and especially note 38 to that chapter (list of Pythagorean tribal
taboos).
2
This means that the interpretation does not convey any empirical
information, as shown in my The Logic of Scientific Discovery.
3
One of the features which the doctrines of the chosen people, the chosen
race, and the chosen class have in common is that they originated, and became
important, as reactions against some kind of oppression. The doctrine of the
chosen people became important at the time of the foundation of the Jewish
church, i.e. during the Babylonian captivity; Count Gobineau’s theory of the
Aryan master race was a reaction of the aristocratic emigrant to the claim that
the French Revolution had successfully expelled the Teutonic masters. Marx’s
prophecy of the victory of the proletariat is his reply to one of the most sinister
periods of oppression and exploitation in modern history. Compare with these
matters chapter 10, especially note 39, and chapter 17, especially notes 13-15,
and text.
* One of the briefest and best summaries of the historicist creed can be
found in the radically historicist pamphlet which is quoted more fully at the end
of note 12 to chapter 9, entitled Christians in the Class Struggle, by Gilbert
Cope, Foreword by the Bishop of Bradford. (‘Magnificat’ Publication No. 1,
Published by the Council of Clergy and Ministers for Common Ownership,
1942, 28, Maypole Lane, Birmingham 14.) Here we read, on pp. 5-6: ‘Common
to all these views is a certain quality of “inevitability plus freedom”. Biological
evolution, the class conflict succession, the action of the Holy Spirit—all three
are characterized by a definite motion towards an end. That motion may be
hindered or deflected for a time by deliberate human action, but its gathering
momentum cannot be dissipated, and though the final stage is but dimly
apprehended,..’ it is ‘possible to know enough about the process to help forward
or to delay the inevitable flow. In other words, the natural laws of what we
observe to be “progress” are sufficiently .. understood by men so that they can ..

either .. make efforts to arrest or divert the main stream—efforts which may
seem to be successful for a time, but which are in fact foredoomed to failure.’ *
4
Hegel said that, in his Logic, he had preserved the whole of Heraclitus’
teaching. He also said that he owed everything to Plato. * It may be worth
mentioning that Ferdinand von Lassalle, one of the founders of the German
social democratic movement (and, like Marx, a Hegelian), wrote two volumes
on Heraclitus.*

Notes To Chapter 2
1

The question ‘What is the world made of?’ is more or less generally
accepted as the fundamental problem of the early Ionian philosophers. I we
assume that they viewed the world as an edifice, the question of the ground-plan
of the world would be complementary to that of its building material. And
indeed, we hear that Thales was not only interested in the stuff the world is
made of, but also in descriptive astronomy and geography, and that
Anaximander was the first to draw up a ground-plan, i.e. a map of the earth.
Some further remarks on the Ionian school (and especially on Anaximander as
predecessor of Heraclitus) will be found in chapter 10; cp. notes 38-40 to that
chapter, especially note 39.
* According to R. Eisler, Weltenmantel und Himmelszelt, p. 693, Homer’s
feeling of destiny (‘moira’) can be traced back to oriental astral mysticism which
deifies time, space, and fate. According to the same author (Revue de Synthese
Historique, 41, app., p. 16 f.), Hesiod’s father was a native of Asia Minor, and
the sources of his idea of the Golden Age, and the metals in man, are oriental.
(Cp. on this question Eisler’s forthcoming posthumous study of Plato, Oxford
1950.) Eisler also shows (Jesus Basileus, vol. II, 618 f.) that the idea of the
world as a totality of things (‘cosmos’) goes back to Babylonian political theory.
The idea of the world as an edifice (a house or tent) is treated in his
Weltenmantel.*
2
See Diels, Die Vorsokratiker, 5th edition, 1934 (abbreviated here as ‘D5’),
fragment 124; cp. also D5, vol. II, p. 423, lines 21 f. (The interpolated negation
seems to me methodologically as unsound as the attempt of certain authors to
discredit the fragment altogether; apart from this, I follow Rüstow’s
emendation.) For the two other quotations in this paragraph, see Plato, Cratylus,
401d, 402a/b.
My interpretation of the teaching of Heraclitus is perhaps different from that
commonly assumed at present, for instance from that of Burnet. Those who may
feel doubtful whether it is at all tenable are referred to my notes, especially the
present note and notes 6, 7, and 11, in which I am dealing with Heraclitus’
natural philosophy, having confined my text to a presentation of the historicist
aspect of Heraclitus’ teaching and to his social philosophy. I further refer them
to the evidence of chapters 4 to 9, and especially of chapter 10, in whose light
Heraclitus’ philosophy, as I see it, appears as a somewhat typical reaction to the
social revolution which he witnessed. Cp. also the notes 39 and 59 to that
chapter (and text), and the general criticism of Burnet’s and Taylor’s methods in
note 56.
As indicated in the text, I hold (with many others, for instance, with Zeller
and Grote) that the doctrine of universal flux is the central doctrine of
Heraclitus. As opposed to this, Burnet holds that this ‘is hardly the central point

in the system’ of Heraclitus (cp. Early Greek Philosophy, 2nd ed., 163). But a
close inspection of his arguments (158 f.) leaves me quite unconvinced that
Heraclitus’ fundamental discovery was the abstract metaphysical doctrine ‘that
wisdom is not the knowledge of many things, but the perception of the
underlying unity of warring opposites’, as Burnet puts it. The unity of opposites
is certainly an important part of Heraclitus’ teaching, but it can be derived (as
far as such things can be derived; cp. note 11 to this chapter, and the
corresponding text) from the more concrete and intuitively understandable
theory of flux; and the same can be said of Heraclitus’ doctrine of the fire (cp.
note 7 to this chapter).
Those who suggest, with Burnet, that the doctrine of universal flux was not
new, but anticipated by the earlier Ionians, are, I feel, unconscious witnesses to
Heraclitus’ originality; for they fail now, after 2, 400 years, to grasp his main
point. They do not see the difference between a flux or circulation within a
vessel or an edifice or a cosmic framework, i.e. within a totality of things (part
of the Heraclitean theory can indeed be understood in this way, but only that
part of it which is not very original; see below), and a universal flux which
embraces everything, even the vessel, the framework itself (cp. Lucian in D5 I,
p. 190) and which is described by Heraclitus’ denial of the existence of any
fixed thing whatever. (In a way, Anaximander had made a beginning by
dissolving the framework, but there was still a long way from this to the theory
of universal flux. Cp. also note 15 (4) to chapter 3.)
The doctrine of universal flux forces Heraclitus to attempt an explanation of
the apparent stability of the things in this world, and of other typical
regularities. This attempt leads him to the development of subsidiary theories,
especially to his doctrine of fire (cp. note 7 to this chapter) and of natural laws
(cp. note 6). It is in this explanation of the apparent stability of the world that he
makes much use of the theories of his predecessors by developing their theory of
rarefaction and condensation, together with their doctrine of the revolution of
the heavens, into a general theory of the circulation of matter, and of periodicity.
But this part of his teaching, I hold, is not central to it, but subsidiary. It is, so to
speak, apologetic, for it attempts to reconcile the new and revolutionary doctrine
of flux with common experience as well as with the teaching of his
predecessors. I believe, therefore, that he is not a mechanical materialist who
teaches something like the conservation and circulation of matter and of energy;
this view seems to me to be excluded by his magical attitude towards laws as
well as by his theory of the unity of opposites which emphasizes his mysticism.
My contention that the universal flux is the central theory of Heraclitus is, I
believe, corroborated by Plato. The overwhelming majority of his explicit
references to Heraclitus (Crat., 401d, 402a/b, 411, 437 ff., 440; Theaet., 153c/d,
160d, 177c, 179d f., 182a ff., 183a ff., cp. also Symp., 207d, Phil., 43a; cp. also
Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 987a33, 1010a13, 1078b13) witness to the tremendous
impression made by this central doctrine upon the thinkers of that period. These
straightforward and clear testimonies are much stronger than the admittedly
interesting passage which does not mention Heraclitus’ name (Soph., 242d f.,
quoted already, in connection with Heraclitus, by Überweg and Zeller), on
which Burnet attempts to base his interpretation. (His other witness, Philo
Judaeus, cannot count much as against the evidence of Plato and Aristotle.) But
even this passage agrees completely with our interpretation. (With regard to
Burnet’s somewhat wavering judgement concerning the value of this passage,

cp. note 56 (7) to chapter 10.) Heraclitus’ discovery that the world is not the
totality of things but of events or facts is not at all trivial; this can be perhaps
gauged by the fact that Wittgenstein has found it necessary to reaffirm it quite
recently: ‘The world is the totality of facts, not of things’ (Cp. Tractatus LogicoPhilosophicus, 1921/22, sentence 1.1; italics mine.)
To sum up. I consider the doctrine of universal flux as fundamental, and as
emerging from the realm of Heraclitus’ social experiences. All other doctrines of
his are in a way subsidiary to it. The doctrine of fire (cp. Aristotle’s
Metaphysics, 984a7, 1067a2; also 989a2, 996a9, 1001a15; Physics, 205a3) I
consider to be his central doctrine in the field of natural philosophy; it is an
attempt to reconcile the doctrine of flux with our experience of stable things, a
link with the older theories of circulation, and it leads to a theory of laws. And
the doctrine of the unity of opposites I consider as something less central and
more abstract, as a forerunner of a kind of logical or methodological theory (as
such it inspired Aristotle to formulate his law of contradiction), and as linked to
his mysticism.
3
W. Nestle, Die Vorsokratiker (1905). 35.
4
In order to facilitate the identification of the fragments quoted, I give the
numbers of Bywater’s edition (adopted, in his English translation of the
fragments, by Burnet, Early Greek Philosophy), and also the numbers of Diels’
5th edition.
Of the eight passages quoted in the present paragraph, (1) and (2) are from
the fragments B 114 (= Bywater, and Burnet), D5 121 (= Diels, 5th edition). The
others are from the fragments: (3) B in, D5 29; cp. Plato’s Republic, 586a/b ...
(4): B 111, D5 104... (5): B 112, D5 39 (cp. D5, vol. I, p. 65, Bias, 1)... (6): B 5,
D5 17... (7): B 110, D5 33... (8): B 100, D5 44.
5
The three passages quoted in this paragraph are from the fragments: (1)
and (2): cp. B 41, D5 91; for (1) cp. also note 2 to this chapter. (3): D5 74.
6
The two passages are B 21, D5 31; and B 22, D5 90.
7
For Heraclitus’ ‘measures’ (or laws, or periods), see B 20, 21, 23, 29; D5
30, 31, 94. (D 31 brings ‘measure’ and ‘law’ (logos) together.)
The five passages quoted later in this paragraph are from the fragments: (1):
D5, vol. I, p. 141, line 10. (Cp. Diog. Laert., IX, 7.)... (2): B 29, D5 94 (cp. note 2
to chapter 5)... (3): B 34, D5 100... (4): B 20, D5 30... (5): B 26, D5 66.
(1) The idea of law is correlative to that of change or flux, since only laws
or regularities within the flux can explain the apparent stability of the world. The
most typical regularities within the changing world known to man are the natural
periods: the day, the moon-month, and the year (the seasons). Heraclitus’ theory
of law is, I believe, logically intermediate between the comparatively modern
views of ‘causal laws’ (held by Leucippus and especially by Democritus) and
Anaximander’s dark powers of fate. Heraclitus’ laws are still ‘magical’, i.e. he
has not yet distinguished between abstract causal regularities and laws enforced,
like taboos, by sanctions (with this, cp. chapter 5, note 2). It appears that his
theory of fate was connected with a theory of a ‘Great Year’ or ‘Great Cycle’ of
18,000 or 36,000 ordinary years. (Cp. for instance J. Adam’s edition of The
Republic of Plato, vol. II, 303.) I certainly do not think that this theory is an
indication that Heraclitus did not really believe in a universal flux, but only in
various circulations which always re-established the stability of the framework;
but I think it possible that he had difficulties in conceiving a law of change, and

even of fate, other than one involving a certain amount of periodicity. (Cp. also
note 6 to chapter 3.)
(2) Fire plays a central role in Heraclitus’ philosophy of nature. (There may
be some Persian influence here.) The flame is the obvious symbol of a flux or
process which appears in many respects as a thing. It thus explains the
experience of stable things, and reconciles this experience with the doctrine of
flux. This idea can easily be extended to living bodies which are like flames,
only burning more slowly. Heraclitus teaches that all things are in flux, all are
like fire; their flux has only different ‘measures’ or laws of motion. The ‘bowl’
or ‘trough’ in which the fire burns will be in a much slower flux than the fire,
but it will be in flux nevertheless. It changes, it has its fate and its laws, it must
be burned into by the fire, and consumed, even if it takes a longer time before its
fate is fulfilled. Thus, ‘in its advance, the fire will judge and convict everything’
(B 26, D5 66).
Accordingly, the fire is the symbol and the explanation of the apparent rest
of things in spite of their real state of flux. But it is also a symbol of the
transmutation of matter from one stage (fuel) into another. It thus provides she
link between Heraclitus’ intuitive theory of nature and the theories of rarefaction
and condensation, etc., of his predecessors. But its flaring up and dying down, in
accordance with the measure of fuel provided, is also an instance of a law. If this
is combined with some form of periodicity, then it can be used to explain the
regularities of natural periods, such as days or years. (This trend of thought
renders it unlikely that Burnet is right in disbelieving the traditional reports of
Heraclitus’ belief in a periodical conflagration, which was probably connected
with his Great Year; cp. Aristotle, Physics, 205a3 with D5 66.)
8
The thirteen passages quoted in this paragraph are from the fragments.
(1): B 10, D5 123... (2): B 11, D5 93... (3): B 16, D5 40... (4): B 94, D5 73...
(5): B 95, D5 89... with (4) and (5), cp. Plato’s Republic, 476c f., and 520c ... (6):
B 6, D5 19... (7): B 3, D5 34... (8): B 19, D5 41... (9): B 92, D5 2... (10): B p91a,
D5 113... (11): B 59, D5 10... (12): B 65, D5 32... (13): B 28, D5 64.
9
More consistent than most moral historicists, Heraclitus is also an ethical
and juridical positivist (for this term, cp. chapter 5): ‘All things are, to the gods,
fair and good and right; men, however, have taken up some things as wrong, and
some as right.’ (D5 102, B 61; see passage (8) in note 11.) That he was the first
juridical positivist is attested by Plato (Theaet., 177c/d). On moral and juridical
positivism in general, cp. chapters (text to notes 14-18) and chapter 22.
10
The two passages quoted in this paragraph are: (1): B 44, D5 53... (2): B
5
62, D 80.
11
The nine passages quoted in this paragraph are: (1): B 39, D5 126... (2): B
104, D5 in ... (3): B 78, D5 88... (4): B 45, D5 51... (5): D5 8... (6): B 69, D5 60...
(7): B 50, D5 59... (8): B 61, D5 102 (cp. note 9)... (9): B 57, D5 58. (Cp.
Aristotle, Physics, 185b20.
Flux or change must be the transition from one stage or property or position
to another. In so far as flux presupposes something that changes, this something
must remain identically the same, even though it assumes an opposite stage or
property or position. This links the theory of flux to that of the unity of opposites
(cp. Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1005b25, 1024a24 and 34, 1062a32, 1063a25) as
well as the doctrine of the oneness of all things; they are all only different
phases or appearances of the one changing something (of fire).

Whether ‘the path that leads up’ and ‘the path that leads down’ were
originally conceived as an ordinary path leading first up a mountain, and later
down again (or perhaps: leading up from the point of view of the man who is
down, and down from that of the man who is up), and whether this metaphor
was only later applied to the processes of circulation, to the path that leads up
from earth through water (perhaps liquid fuel in a bowl?) to the fire, and down
again from the fire through the water (rain?) to earth; or whether Heraclitus’
path up and down was originally applied by him to this process of circulation of
matter; all this can of course not be decided. (But I think that the first alternative
is more likely in view of the great number of similar ideas in Heraclitus’
fragments: cp. the text.)
12
The four passages are: (1): B 102, D5 24... (2): B 101, D5 25 (a closer
version which more or less preserves Heraclitus’ pun is: ‘Greater death wins
greater destiny.’ Cp. also Plato’s Laws, 903 d/e; contrast with Rep. 617 d/e)...
(3): B 111, D5 29 (part of the continuation is quoted above; see passage (3) in
note 4)... (4): B 113, D5 49.
13
It seems very probable (cp. Meyer’s Gesch. d. Altertums, esp. vol. I) that
such characteristic teachings as that of the chosen people originated in this
period, which produced several other religions of salvation besides the Jewish.
14
Comte, who in France developed a historicist philosophy not very
dissimilar from Hegel’s Prussian version, tried, like Hegel, to stem the
revolutionary tide. (Cp. F. A. von Hayek, The Counter-Revolution of Science,
Economica, N.S. vol. VIII, 1941, pp. 119 ff, 281 ff.) For Lassalle’s interest in
Heraclitus, see note 4 to chapter11.—It is interesting to note, in this connection,
the parallelism between the history of historicist and of evolutionary ideas. They
originated in Greece with the semi-Heraclitean Empedocles (for Plato’s version,
see note 1 to chapter 11), and they were revived, in England as well as in
France, in the time of the French Revolution.

Notes To Chapter 3
1

With this explanation of the term oligarchy, cp. also the end of notes 44
and 57 to chapter 8.
2
Cp. especially note 48 to chapter 10.
3
Cp. the end of chapter 7, esp. note 25, and chapter 10, esp. note 69.
4
Cp. Diogenes Laert., III, 1.—Concerning Plato’s family connections, and
especially the alleged descent of his father’s family from Codrus, ‘and even
from the God Poseidon’, see G. Grote, Plato and other Companions of Socrates
(ed. 1875), vol. I, 114. (See, however, the similar remark on Critias’ family, i.e.
on that of Plato’s mother, in E. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, vol. V, 1922,
p. 66.) Plato says of Codrus in the Symposium (208d): ‘Do you suppose that
Alcestis,... or Achilles,... or that your own Codrus would have sought death—in
order to save the kingship for his children—had they not expected to win that
immortal memory of their virtue in which indeed we keep them? ‘Plato praises
Critias’ (i.e. his mother’s) family in the early Charmides (157e ff.) and in the
late Timaeus (20e), where the family is traced back to the Athenian ruler
(archōn) Dropides, the friend of Solon.
5
The two autobiographical quotations which follow in this paragraph are
from the Seventh Letter (325). Plato’s authorship of the Letters has been
questioned by some eminent scholars (perhaps without sufficient foundation; I

think Field’s treatment of this problem very convincing; cp. note 57 to chapter
10; on the other hand, even the Seventh Letter looks to me a little suspicious—it
repeats too much what we know from the Apology, and says too much what the
occasion requires). I have therefore taken care to base my interpretation of
Platonism mainly on some of the most famous dialogues; it is, however, in
general agreement with the Letters. For the reader’s convenience, a list of those
Platonic dialogues which are frequently mentioned in the text may be given
here, in what is their probable historical order; cp. note 56 (8) to chapter 10.
Crito—Apology—Eutyphro;
Protagoras—Meno—Gorgias;
Cratylus—
Menexenus—Phaedo; Republic; Parmenides—Theaetetus; Sophist—Statesman
(or Politicus)—Philebus; Timaeus—Critias; Laws.
6
(1) That historical developments may have a cyclic character is nowhere
very clearly stated by Plato. It is, however, alluded to in at least four dialogues,
namely in the Phaedo, in the Republic, in the Statesman (or Politicus), and in
the Laws. In all these places, Plato’s theory may possibly allude to Heraclitus’
Great Year (cp. note 6 to chapter 2). It may be, however, that the allusion is not
to Heraclitus directly, but rather to Empedocles, whose theory (cp. also
Aristotle, Met., 1000a25 f.) Plato considered as merely a ‘milder’ version of the
Heraclitean theory of the unity of all flux. He expresses this in a famous passage
of the Sophist (242e f.). According to this passage, and to Aristotle (De Gen.
Corr., B, 6., 334a6), there is a historical cycle embracing a period in which love
rules, and a period in which Heraclitus’ strife rules; and Aristotle tells us that,
according to Empedocles, the present period is ‘now a period of the reign of
Strife, as it was formerly one of Love’. This insistence that the flux of our own
cosmic period is a kind of strife, and therefore bad, is in close accordance both
with Plato’s theories and with his experiences. The length of the Great Year is,
probably, the period of time after which all heavenly bodies return to the same
positions relative to each other as were held by them at the moment from which
the period is reckoned. (This would make it the smallest common multiple of the
periods of the ‘seven planets’.)
(2) The passage in the Phaedo mentioned under (1) alludes first to the
Heraclitean theory of change leading from one state to its opposite state, or from
one opposite to the other: ‘that which becomes less must once have been greater
..’ (706/713). It then proceeds to indicate a cyclic law of development: ‘Are
there not two processes which are ever going on, from one extreme to its
opposite, and back again ..?’ (loc. cit.). And a little later (72a/b) the argument is
put like this: ‘If the development were in a straight line only, and there were no
compensation or cycle in nature,.. then, in the end, all things would take on the
same properties .. and there would be no further development.’ It appears that
the general tendency of the Phaedo is more optimistic (and shows more faith in
man and in human reason) than that of the later dialogues, but there are no direct
references to human historical development.
(3) Such references are, however, made in the Republic where, in Books
VIII and IX, we find an elaborate description of historical decay treated here in
chapter 4. This description is introduced by Plato’s Story of the Fall of Man and
of the Number, which will here be discussed more fully in chapters 5 and 8. J.
Adam, in his edition of The Republic of Plato (1902, 1921), rightly calls this
story ‘the setting in which Plato’s “Philosophy of History” is framed’ (vol. II,
210). This story does not contain any explicit statement on the cyclic character
of history, but it contains a few rather mysterious hints which, according to

Aristotle’s (and Adam’s) interesting but uncertain interpretation, are possibly
allusions to the Heraclitean Great Year, i.e. to the cyclic development. (Cp. note
6 to chapter 2, and Adam, op. cit., vol. II, 303; the remark on Empedocles made
there, 303 f., needs correction; see (1) in this note, above.)
(4) There is, furthermore, the myth in the Statesman (268e-274c).
According to this myth, God himself steers the world for half a cycle of the great
world period. When he lets go, then the world, which so far has moved forward,
begins to roll back again. Thus we have two half-periods or half-cycles in the
full cycle, a forward movement led by God constituting the good period without
war or strife, and a backward movement when God abandons the world, which
is a period of increasing disorganization and strife. It is, of course, the period in
which we live. Ultimately, things will become so bad that God will take the
wheel again, and reverse the motion, in order to save the world from utter
destruction.
This myth shows great resemblances to Empedocles’ myth mentioned in (1)
above, and probably also to Heraclitus’ Great Year.—Adam (op. cit., vol. II, 296
f.) also points out the similarities with Hesiod’s story. * One of the points which
allude to Hesiod is the reference to a Golden Age of Cronos; and it is important
to note that the men of this age are earth-born. This establishes a point of contact
with the Myth of the Earth-born, and of the metals in man, which plays a role in
the Republic (414b ff. and 546e f.); this role is discussed below in chapter 8. The
Myth of the Earth-born is also alluded to in the Symposium (191b); possibly the
allusion is to the popular claim that the Athenians are ‘like grasshoppers’—
autochthonous (cp. notes 32 (1)e to chapter 4 and 11(2) to chapter 8).*
When, however, later in the Statesman (302b ff.) the six forms of imperfect
government are ordered according to their degree of imperfection, there is no
indication any longer to be found of a cyclic theory of history. Rather, the six
forms, which are all degenerate copies of the perfect or best state (Statesman,
293d/e; 297c; 303b), appear all as steps in the process of degeneration; i.e. both
here and in the Republic Plato confines himself, when it comes to more concrete
historical problems, to that part of the cycle which leads to decay.
* (5) Analogous remarks hold for the Laws. Something like a cyclic theory
is sketched in Book III, 676b/c-677b, where Plato turns to a more detailed
analysis of the beginning of one of the cycles; and in 678e and 679c, this
beginning turns out to be a Golden Age, so that the further story again becomes
one of deterioration.—It may be mentioned that Plato’s doctrine, that the planets
are gods, together with the doctrine that the gods influence human lives (and
with his belief that cosmic forces are at work in history), played an important
part in the astrological speculations of the neo-Platonists. All three doctrines can
be found in the Laws (see, for example, 821b-d and 899b; 899d-905d; 677a ff.).
Astrology, it should be realized, shares with historicism the belief in a
determinate destiny which can be predicted; and it shares with some important
versions of historicism (especially with Platonism and Marxism) the belief that,
notwithstanding the possibility of predicting the future, we have some influence
upon it, especially if we actually know what is coming.*
(6) Apart from these scanty allusions, there is hardly anything to indicate
that Plato took the upward or forward part of the cycle seriously. But there are
many remarks, apart from the elaborate description in the Republic and that
quoted in (5), which show that he believed very seriously in the downward

movement, in the decay of history. We must consider, especially, the Timaeus,
and the Laws.
(7) In the Timaeus (42b f., 90e ff., and especially 91d f.; cp. also the
Phaedrus, 248d f.), Plato describes what may be called the origin of species by
degeneration (cp. text to note 4 to chapter 4, and note 11 to chapter 11): Men
degenerate into women, and later into lower animals.
(8) In Book III of the Laws (cp. also Book IV, 713a ff.; see however the
short allusion to a cycle mentioned above) we have a rather elaborate theory of
historical decay, largely analogous to that in the Republic. See also the next
chapter, especially notes 3, 6, 7, 27, 31, and 44.
7
A similar opinion of Plato’s political aims is expressed by G. C. Field,
Plato and His Contemporaries (1930), p. 91: ‘The chief aim of Plato’s
philosophy may be regarded as the attempt to re-establish standards of thought
and conduct for a civilization that seemed on the verge of dissolution.’ See also
note 3 to chapter 6, and text.
8
I follow the majority of the older and a good number of contemporary
authorities (e.g. G. C. Field, F. M. Cornford, A. K. Rogers) in believing, against
John Burnet and A. E. Taylor, that the theory of Forms or Ideas is nearly entirely
Plato’s, and not Socrates’, in spite of the fact that Plato puts it into the mouth of
Socrates as his main speaker. Though Plato’s dialogues are our only first-rate
source for Socrates’ teaching, it is, I believe, possible to distinguish in them
between ‘Socratic’, i.e. historically true, and ‘Platonic’ features of Plato’s
speaker ‘Socrates’. The so-called Socratic Problem is discussed in chapters 6, 7,
8, and 10; cp. especially note 56 to chapter 10.
9
The term ‘social engineering’ seems to have been used first by Roscoe
Pound, in his Introduction to the Philosophy of Law (1922, p. 99;* Bryan Magee
tells me now that the Webbs used it almost certainly before 1922.*) He uses the
term in the ‘piecemeal’ sense. In another sense it is used by M. Eastman,
Marxism: is it Science? (1940). I read Eastman’s book after the text of my own
book was written; my term ‘social engineering’ is, accordingly, used without
any intention of alluding to Eastman’s terminology. As far as I can see, he
advocates the approach which I criticize in chapter 9 under the name ‘Utopian
social engineering’; cp. note 1 to that chapter.—See also note 18 (3) to chapter
5. As the first social engineer one might describe the town-planner Hippodamus
of Miletus. (Cp. Aristotle’s Politics 1276b22, and R. Eisler, Jesus Basileus, II, p.
754.)
The term ‘social technology’ has been suggested to me by C. G. F.
Simkin.—I wish to make it clear that in discussing problems of method, my
main emphasis is upon gaining practical institutional experience. Cp. chapter g,
especially text to note 8 to that chapter. For a more detailed analysis of the
problems of method connected with social engineering and social technology,
see my The Poverty of Historicism (and edition, 1960), part in.
10
The quoted passage is from my The Poverty of Historicism, p. 65. The
‘undesigned results of human actions’ are more fully discussed below, in chapter
14, see especially note 11 and text.
11
I believe in a dualism of facts and decisions or demands (or of ‘is’ and
‘ought’); in other words, I believe in the impossibility of reducing decisions or
demands to facts, although they can, of course, be treated as facts. More on this
point will be said in chapters 5 (text to notes 4-5), 22, and 24.

12

Evidence in support of this interpretation of Plato’s theory of the best
state will be supplied in the next three chapters; I may refer, in the meanwhile,
to Statesman, 293d/e; 297c; Laws, 713b/c; 739d/e; Timaeus, 22d ff., especially
25e and 26d.
13
Cp. Aristotle’s famous report, partly quoted later in this chapter (see
especially note 25 to this chapter, and the text).
14
This is shown in Grote’s Plato, vol. III, note u on p. 267 f.
15
The quotations are from the Timaeus, 50c/d and 51e-52b. The simile
which describes the Forms or Ideas as the fathers, and Space as the mother, of
the sensible things, is important and has far-reaching connections. Cp. also notes
17 and 19 to this chapter, and note 59 to chapter 10.
(1) It resembles Hesiod’s myth of chaos, the yawning gap (space;
receptacle) which corresponds to the mother, and the God Eros, who
corresponds to the father or to the Ideas. Chaos is the origin, and the question of
the causal explanation (chaos = cause) remains for a long time one of origin
(archē) or birth or generation.
(2) The mother or space corresponds to the indefinite or boundless of
Anaximander and of the Pythagoreans. The Idea, which is male, must therefore
correspond to the definite (or limited) of the Pythagoreans. For the definite, as
opposed to the boundless, the male, as opposed to the female, the light, as
opposed to the dark, and the good, as opposed to the bad, all belong to the same
side in the Pythagorean table of opposites. (Cp. Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 96a22
f.) We also can therefore expect to see the Ideas associated with light and
goodness. (Cp. end of note 32 to chapter 8.)
(3) The Ideas are boundaries or limits, they are definite, as opposed to
indefinite Space, and impress or imprint (cp. note 17 (2) to this chapter)
themselves like rubber-stamps, or better, like moulds, upon Space (which is not
only space but at the same time Anaximander’s unformed matter—stuff without
property), thus generating sensible things. * J. D. Mabbott has kindly drawn my
attention to the fact that the Forms or Ideas, according to Plato, do not impress
themselves upon Space but are, rather, impressed or imprinted upon it by the
Demiurge. Traces of the theory that the Forms are ‘causes both of being and of
generation (or becoming)’ can be found already in the Phaedo (100d), as
Aristotle points out (in Metaphysics 1080a2).*
(4) In consequence of the act of generation, Space, i.e. the receptacle,
begins to labour, so that all things are set in motion, in a Heraclitean or
Empedoclean flux which is really universal in so far as the movement or flux
extends even to the framework, i.e. (boundless) space itself. (For the late
Heraclitean idea of the receptacle, cp. the Cratylus, 412d.)
(5) This description is also reminiscent of Parmenides’ ‘Way of Delusive
Opinion’, in which the world of experience and of flux is created by the
mingling of two opposites, the light (or hot or fire) and the dark (or cold or
earth). It is clear that Plato’s Forms or Ideas would correspond to the former,
and space or what is boundless to the latter; especially if we consider that Plato’s
pure space is closely akin to indeterminate matter.
(6) The opposition between the determinate and indeterminate seems also to
correspond, especially after the all-important discovery of the irrationality of the
square root of two, to the opposition between the rational and the irrational. But
since Parmenides identifies the rational with being, this would lead to an
interpretation of space or the irrational as non-being. In other words, the

Pythagorean table of opposites is to be extended to cover rationality, as opposed
to irrationality, and being, as opposed to non-being. (This agrees with
Metaphysics, 1004b27, where Aristotle says that ‘all the contraries are reducible
to being and non-being’; 1072a31, where one side of the table—that of being—
is described as the object of (rational) thought; and 1093b13, where the powers
of certain numbers—presumably in opposition to their roots—are added to this
side. This would further explain Aristotle’s remark in Metaphysics, 986b27; and
it would perhaps not be necessary to assume, as F. M. Cornford does in his
excellent article ‘Parmenides’ Two Ways’, Class. Quart., XVII, 1933, p. 108,
that Parmenides, fr. 8, 53/54, ‘has been misinterpreted by Aristotle and
Theophrastus’; for if we expand the table of opposites in this way, Cornford’s
most convincing interpretation of the crucial passage of fr. 8 becomes
compatible with Aristotle’s remark.)
(7) Cornford has explained (op. cit., 100) that there are three ‘ways’ in
Parmenides, the way of Truth, the way of Not-being, and the way of Seeming
(or, if I may call it so, of delusive opinion). He shows (101) that they correspond
to three regions discussed in the Republic, the perfectly real and rational world
of the Ideas, the perfectly unreal, and the world of opinion (based on the
perception of things in flux). He has also shown (102) that in the Sophist, Plato
modifies his position. To this, some comments may be added from the point of
view of the passages in the Timaeus to which this note is appended.
(8) The main difference between the Forms or Ideas of the Republic and
those of the Timaeus is that in the former, the Forms (and also God; cp. Rep.,
380d) are petrified, so to speak, while in the latter, they are deified. In the
former, they bear a much closer resemblance to the Parmenidean One (cp.
Adam’s note to Rep., 380d28, 31), than in the latter. This development leads to
the Laws, where the Ideas are largely replaced by souls. The decisive difference
is that the Ideas become more and more the starting points of motion and causes
of generation, or as the Timaeus puts it, fathers of the moving things. The
greatest contrast is perhaps between the Phaedo, 79e: ‘The soul is infinitely
more like the unchangeable; even the most stupid person would not deny that’
(cp. also Rep., 585c, 609b f.), and the Laws, 895e/896a (cp. Phaedrus, 245c ff.):
‘What is the definition of that which is named “soul”? Can we imagine any other
definition than .. “The motion that moves itself”?’ The transition between these
two positions is, perhaps, provided by the Sophist (which introduces the Form or
Idea of motion itself) and by the Timaeus, 353, which describes the ‘divine and
unchanging Forms and the changing and corruptible bodies. This seems to
explain why, in the Laws (cp. 894d/e), the motion of the soul is said to be ‘first
in origin and power’ and why the soul is described (966e) as ‘the most ancient
and divine of all things whose motion is an ever-flowing source of real
existence’. (Since, according to Plato, all living things have souls, it may be
claimed that he admitted the presence of an at least partly formal principle in
things; a point of view which is very close to Aristotelianism, especially in the
presence of the primitive and widespread belief that all things are alive.) (Cp.
also note 7 to chapter 4.) (a) In this development of Plato’s thought, a
development whose driving force is to explain the world of flux with the help of
the Ideas, i.e. to make the break between the world of reason and the world of
opinion at least understandable, even though it cannot be bridged, the Sophist
seems to play a decisive role. Apart from making room, as Cornford mentions
(op. cit., 102), for the plurality of Ideas, it presents them, in an argument against

Plato’s own earlier position (248a ff.): (a) as active causes, which may interact,
for example, with mind; (b) as unchanging in spite of that, although there is now
an Idea of motion in which all moving things participate and which is not at rest;
(c) as capable of mingling with one another. It further introduces ‘Not-being’,
identified in the Timaeus with Space (cp. Cornford, Plato’s Theory of
Knowledge, 1935, note to 247), and thus makes it possible for the Ideas to
mingle with it (cp. also Philolaus, fr. 2, 3, 5, Diels5), and to produce the world of
flux with its characteristic intermediate position between the being of Ideas and
the not-being of Space or matter.
(10) Ultimately, I wish to defend my contention in the text that the Ideas are
not only outside space, but also outside time, though they are in contact with the
world at the beginning of time. This, I believe, makes it easier to understand
how they act without being in motion; for all motion or flux is in space and time.
Plato, I believe, assumes that time has a beginning. I think that this is the most
direct interpretation of Laws, 721c: ‘the race of man is twin-born with all time’,
considering the many indications that Plato believed man to be created as one of
the first creatures. (In this point, I disagree slightly with Cornford, Plato’s
Cosmology, 1937, p. 145, and pp. 26 ff.)
(11) To sum up, the Ideas are earlier and better than their changing and
decaying copies, and arc themselves not in flux. (See also note 3 to chapter 4.)
16
Cp. note 4 to this chapter.
17
(1) The role of the gods in the Timaeus is similar to the one described in
the text. Just as the Ideas stamp out things, so the gods form the bodies of men.
Only the human soul is created by the Demiurge himself who also creates the
world and the gods. (For another hint that the gods are patriarchs, see Laws,
713c/d.) Men, the weak, degenerate children of gods, are then liable to further
degeneration; cp. note 6 (7) to this chapter, and 37-41 to chapter 5.
(a) In an interesting passage of the Laws (681b; cp. also note 32 (1, a) to
chapter 4) we find another allusion to the parallelism between the relation
Idea—things and the relation parent—children. In this passage, the origin of
law is explained by the influence of tradition, and more especially, by the
transmission of a rigid order from the parents to the children; and the following
remark is made: ‘And they (the parents) would be sure to stamp upon their
children, and upon their children’s children, their own cast of mind.’
18
Cp. note 49, especially (3), to chapter 8.
19
Cp. Timaeus, 31 a. The term which I have freely translated by ‘superior
thing which is their prototype’ is a term frequently used by Aristotle with the
meaning ‘universal’ or ‘generic term’. It means a ‘thing which is general’ or
‘surpassing’ or ‘embracing’; and I suspect that it originally means ‘embracing’
or ‘covering’ in the sense in which a mould embraces or covers what it moulds.
20
Cp. Republic, 597c. See also 596a (and Adam’s second note to 596a5):
For we are in the habit, you will remember, of postulating a Form or Idea— one
for each group of many particular things to which we apply the same name.’
21
There are innumerable passages in Plato; I mention only the Phaedo (e.g.
79a), the Republic, 544a, the Theaetetus (152d/e, 179d/e), the Timaeus (28b/c,
29c/d, 51d f.). Aristotle mentions it in Metaphysics, 987a32; 999a25-999b10;
1010a6-15; 1078b15; see also notes 23 and 25 to this chapter.
22
Parmenides taught, as Burnet puts it (Early Greek Philosophy2, 208), that
‘what is .. is finite, spherical, motionless, corporeal’, i.e. that the world is a full
globe, a whole without any parts, and that ‘there is nothing beyond it’. I am

quoting Burnet because (a) his description is excellent and (b) it destroys his
own interpretation (E.G. P., 208-11) of what Parmenides calls the ‘Opinion of
the Mortals’ (or the Way of Delusive Opinion). For Burnet dismisses there all
the interpretations of Aristotle, Theophrastus, Simplicius, Gomperz, and Meyer,
as ‘anachronisms’ or ‘palpable anachronisms’, etc. Now the interpretation
dismissed by Burnet is practically the same as the one here proposed in the text;
namely, that Parmenides believed in a world of reality behind this world of
appearance. Such a dualism, which would allow Parmenides’ description of the
world of appearance to claim at least some kind of adequacy, is dismissed by
Burnet as hopelessly anachronistic. I suggest, however, that if Parmenides had
believed solely in his unmoving world, and not at all in the changing world, then
he would have been really mad (as Empedocles hints). But in fact there is an
indication of a similar dualism already in Xenophanes, fragm. 23-6, if
confronted with fragm. 34 (esp. ‘But all may have their fancy opinions’), so that
we can hardly speak of an anachronism.—As indicated in note 15 (6-7), I follow
Cornford’s interpretation of Parmenides. (See also note 41 to chapter 10.)
23
Cp. Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 1078b23; the next quotation is: op. cit.,
1078b19.
24
This valuable comparison is due to G. C. Field, Plato and His
Contemporaries, 211.
25
The preceding quotation is from Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1078b15; the
next from op. cit., 987b7.
26
In Aristotle’s analysis (in Metaphysics, 987a30-b18) of the arguments
which led to the theory of Ideas (cp. also note 56 (6) to chapter 10), we can
distinguish the following steps: (a) Heraclitus’ flux, (b) the impossibility of true
knowledge of things in flux, (c) the influence of Socrates’ ethical essences, (d)
the Ideas as objects of true knowledge, (e) the influence of the Pythagoreans, (f)
the ‘mathematical’ as intermediate objects.—((e) and (f) I have not mentioned in
the text, where I have mentioned instead (g) the Parmenidean influence.)
It may be worth while to show how these steps can be identified in Plato’s
own work, where he expounds his theory; especially in the Phaedo and in the
Republic, in the Theaetetus and in the Sophist, and in the Timaeus.
(1) In the Phaedo, we find indications of all the points up to and including
(e). In 65a-66a, the steps (d) and (c) are prominent, with an allusion to (b). In
706 step (a), Heraclitus’ theory appears, combined with an element of
Pythagoreanism (e). This leads to 743 ff., and to a statement of step (d). 99-100
is an approach to (d) through (c), etc. For (a) to (d), cp. also the Cratylus, 439c
ff.
In the Republic, it is of course especially Book VI that corresponds closely
to Aristotle’s report, (a) In the beginning of Book VI, 485a/b (cp. 527a/b), the
Heraclitean flux is referred to (and contrasted with the unchanging world of
Forms). Plato there speaks of ‘a reality which exists for ever and is exempt from
generation and degeneration’. (Cp. notes 2 (2) and 3 to chapter 4 and note 33 to
chapter 8, and text.) The steps (b), (d) and especially (f) play a rather obvious
role in the famous Simile of the Line (Rep., 509c-511c; cp. Adam’s notes, and
his appendix I to Book VII); Socrates’ ethical influence, i.e. step (c), is of course
alluded to throughout the Republic. It plays an important role within the Simile
of the Line and especially immediately before, i.e. in 508b ff., where the role of
the good is emphasized; see in particular 508b/c: ‘This is what I maintain
regarding the offspring of the good. What the good has begotten in its own

likeness is, in the intelligible world, related to reason (and its objects) in the
same way as, in the visible world’, that which is the offspring of the sun, ‘is
related to sight (and its objects).’ Step (e) is implied in (f), but more fully
developed in Book VII, in the famous Curriculum (cp. especially 523a-527c),
which is largely based on the Simile of the Line in Book VI.
(2) In the Theaetetus, (a) and (b) are treated extensively; (c) is mentioned in
174b and 175c. In the Sophist, all the steps, including (g), are mentioned, only
(e) and (f) being left out; see especially 247a (step (c)); 249c (step (b)); 253d/e
(step (d).) In the Philebus, we find indications of all steps except perhaps (f);
steps (a) to (d) are especially emphasized in 59a-c.
(3) In the Timaeus, all the steps mentioned by Aristotle are indicated, with
the possible exception of (c), which is alluded to only indirectly in the
introductory recapitulation of the contents of the Republic, and in 29d. Step (e)
is, as it were, alluded to throughout, since ‘Timaeus’ is a ‘western’ philosopher
and strongly influenced by Pythagoreanism. The other steps occur twice in a
form almost completely parallel to Aristotle’s account; first briefly in 28a-29d,
and later, with more elaboration, in 486-550. Immediately after (a), i.e. a
Heraclitean description (49a ff.; cp. Cornford, Plato’s Cosmology, 178) of the
world in flux, the argument (b) is raised (51c-e) that if we are right in
distinguishing between reason (or true knowledge) and mere opinion, we must
admit the existence of the unchangeable Forms; these are (in 51e f.) introduced
next in accordance with step (d). The Heraclitean flux then comes again (as
labouring space), but this time it is explained, as 3 consequence of the act of
generation. And as a next step (f) appears, in 53c. (I suppose that the ‘lines and
planes and solids’ mentioned by Aristotle in Metaphysics, 992b13, refer to 53c
ff.)
(4) It seems that this parallelism between the Timaeus and Aristotle’s report
has not been sufficiently emphasized so far; at least, it is not used by G. C. Field
in his excellent and convincing analysis of Aristotle’s report (Plato and His
Contemporaries, 202 ff.). But it would have strengthened Field’s arguments
(arguments, however, which hardly need strengthening, since they are
practically conclusive) against Burnet’s and Taylor’s views that the Theory of
Ideas is Socratic (cp. note 56 to chapter 10). For in the Timaeus, Plato does not
put this theory into the mouth of Socrates, a fact which according to Burnet’s
and Taylor’s principles should prove that it was not Socrates’ theory. (They
avoid this inference by claiming that ‘Timaeus’ is a Pythagorean, and that he
develops not Plato’s philosophy but his own. But Aristotle knew Plato
personally for twenty years and should have been able to judge these matters;
and he wrote his Metaphysics at a time when members of the Academy could
have contradicted his presentation of Platonism.)
(5) Burnet writes, in Greek Philosophy, I, 155 (cp. also p. xliv of his edition
of the Phaedo, 1911): ‘the theory of forms in the sense in which it is maintained
in the Phaedo and Republic is wholly absent from what we may fairly regard the
most distinctively Platonic of the dialogues, those, namely, in which Socrates is
no longer the chief speaker. In that sense it is never even mentioned in any
dialogue later than the Parmenides .. with the single exception of the Timaeus
(51c), where the speaker is a Pythagorean.’ But if it is maintained in the Timaeus
in the sense in which it is maintained in the Republic, then it is certainly so
maintained in the Sophist, 257d/e; and in the Statesman, 269c/d; 286a; 297b/c,
and c/d; 301a and e; 302e; and 303b; and in the Philebus, 15a f., and 59a-d; and

in the Laws, 713b, 739d/e, 962c f, 963c ff., and, most important, 965c (cp.
Philebus, 16d), 965d, and 966a; see also the next note. (Burnet believes in the
genuineness of the Letters, especially the Seventh; but the theory of Ideas is
maintained there in 342a ff.; see also note 56 (5, d) to chapter 10.)
27
Cp. Laws, 895d-e. I do not agree with England’s note (in his edition of
the Laws, vol. II, 472) that ‘the word “essence” will not help us’. True, if we
meant by ‘essence’ some important sensible part of the sensible thing (which
might perhaps be purified and produced by some distillation), then ‘essence’
would be misleading. But the word ‘essential’ is widely used in a way which
corresponds very well indeed with what we wish to express here; something
opposed to the accidental or unimportant or changing empirical aspect of the
thing, whether it is conceived as dwelling in that thing, or in a metaphysical
world of Ideas.
I am using the term ‘essentialism’ in opposition to ‘nominalism’, in order to
avoid, and to replace, the misleading traditional term ‘realism’, wherever it is
opposed (not to ‘idealism’ but) to ‘nominalism’. (See also note 26 ff. to chapter
11, and text, and especially note 38.)
On Plato’s application of his essentialist method, for instance, as mentioned
in the text, to the theory of the soul, sec Laws, 895e f, quoted in note 15 (8) to
this chapter, and chapter 5, especially note 23. See also, for instance, Meno,
86d/e, and Symposium, 199c/d.
28
On the theory of causal explanation, cp. my The Logic of Scientific
Discovery, especially section 12, pp. 59 ff. See also note 6 to chapter 25, below.
29
The theory of language here indicated is that of Semantics, as developed
especially by A. Tarski and R. Carnap. Cp. Carnap, Introduction to Semantics,
1942, and note 23 to chapter 8.
30
The theory that while the physical sciences are based on a methodological
nominalism, the social sciences must adopt essentialist (‘realistic’) methods, has
been made clear to me by K. Polanyi (in 1925); he pointed out, at that time, that
a reform of the methodology of the social sciences might conceivably be
achieved by abandoning this theory.—The theory is held, to some extent, by
most sociologists, especially by J. S. Mill (for instance, Logic, VI, ch. VI, 2; see
also his historicist formulations, e.g. in VI, ch. X, 2, last paragraph: ‘The
fundamental problem .. of the social science is to find the laws according to
which any state of society produces the state which succeeds it ..’), K. Marx (see
below); M. Weber (cp., for example, his definitions in the beginning of
Methodische Grundlagen der Soziologie, in Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, I, and
in Ges. Aufsätze zur Wissenschaftslehre). G. Simmel, A. Vierkandt, R. M.
MacIver, and many more.—The philosophical expression of all these tendencies
is E. Husserl’s ‘Phaenomenology’, a systematic revival of the methodological
essentialism of Plato and Aristotle. (See also chapter 11, especially note 44.)
The opposite, the nominalist attitude in sociology, can be developed, I
think, only as a technological theory of social institutions.
In this context, I may mention how I came to trace historicism back to Plato
and Heraclitus. In analysing historicism, I found that it needs what I call now
methodological essentialism; i.e. I saw that the typical arguments in favour of
essentialism are bound up with historicism (cp. my The Poverty of Historicism).
This led me to consider the history of essentialism. I was struck by the
parallelism between Aristotle’s report and the analysis which I had carried out

originally without any reference to Platonism. In this way, I was reminded of the
roles of both Heraclitus and Plato in this development.
31
R. H. S. Grossman’s Plato To-day (1937) was the first book (apart from
G. Grote’s Plato) I have found to contain a political interpretation of Plato
which is partly similar to my own. See also notes 2-3 to chapter 6, and text.
*Since then I have found that similar views of Plato have been expressed by
various authors. C. M. Bowra (Ancient Greek Literature, 1933) is perhaps the
first; his brief but thorough criticism of Plato (pp. 186-90) is as fair as it is
penetrating. The others are W. Fite (The Platonic Legend, 1934): B. Farrington
(Science and Politics in the Ancient World, 1939); A. D. Winspear (The Genesis
of Plato’s Thought, 1940); and H. Kelsen (Platonic Justice, 1933; now in What
is Justice?, 1957, and Platonic Love, in The American Imago, vol. 3, 1942).*

Notes To Chapter 4
1

Cp. Republic, 608e. See also note 2 (2) to this chapter.
In the Laws, the soul—‘the most ancient and divine of all things in
motion’ (966e)—is described as the ‘starting point of all motion’ (895b). (1)
With the Platonic theory, Aristotle contrasts his own, according to which the
‘good’ thing is not the starting point, but rather the end or aim of change. since
‘good’ means a thing aimed at—the final cause of change. Thus he says of the
Platonists, i.e. of ‘those who believe in Forms’, that they agree with Empedocles
(they speak ‘in the same way’ as Empedocles) in so far as they ‘do not speak as
if anything came to pass/or the sake of these’ (i.e. of things which are ‘good’)
‘but as if all movement started from them’. And he points out that ‘good’ means
therefore to the Platonists not ‘a cause qua good’, i.e. an aim, but that ‘it is only
incidentally a good’. Cp. Metaphysics, 988a35 and b8 ff. and 1075a, 34/35. This
criticism sounds as if Aristotle had sometimes held views similar to those of
Speusippus, which is indeed Zeller’s opinion; see note 11 to chapter 11.
(2) Concerning the movement towards corruption, mentioned in the text in
this paragraph, and its general significance in the Platonic philosophy, we must
keep in mind the general opposition between the world of unchanging things or
Ideas, and the world of sensible things in flux. Plato often expresses this
opposition as one between the world of unchanging things and the world of
corruptible things, or between things that are ungenerated, and those that are
generated and are doomed to degenerate, etc.; see, for instance, Republic,
485a/b, quoted in note 26 (1) to chapter 3 and in text to note 33 to chapter 8;
Republic, 508d-e; 527a/b; and Republic, 546a, quoted in text to note 37 to
chapter 5: ‘All things that have been generated must degenerate’ (or decay).
That this problem of the generation and corruption of the world of things in flux
was an important part of the Platonic School tradition is indicated by the fact
that Aristotle devoted a separate treatise to this problem. Another interesting
indication is the way in which Aristotle talked about these matters in the
introduction to his Politics, contained in the concluding sentences of the
Nicomachean Ethics (1181b/15): ‘We shall try to .. find what it is that preserves
or corrupts the cities ..’ This passage is significant not only as a general
formulation of what Aristotle considered the main problem of his Politics, but
also because of its striking similarity to an important passage in the Laws, viz.
676a, and 676b/c quoted below in text to notes 6 and 25 to this chapter. (See
2

also notes I, 3, and 24/25 to this chapter; see note 32 to chapter 8, and the
passage from the Laws quoted in note 59 to chapter 8.)
3
This quotation is from the Statesman, 269d. (See also note 23 to this
chapter.) For the hierarchy of motions, see Laws, 893c-895b. For the theory that
perfect things (divine ‘natures’; cp. the next chapter) can only become less
perfect when they change, see especially Republic, 380e—381c—in many ways
(note the examples in 380e) a parallel passage to Laws, 797d. The quotations
from Aristotle are from the Metaphysics, 988b3, and from De Gen. et Corr.,
335b14. The last four quotations in this paragraph are from Plato’s Laws, 904c
f., and 797d. See also note 24 to this chapter, and text. (It is Possible to interpret
the remark about the evil objects as another allusion to a cyclic development, as
discussed in note 6 to chapter 2, i.e. as an allusion to the belief that the trend of
the development must reverse, and that things must begin to improve, once the
world has reached the lowest depth of evilness.
* Since my interpretation of the Platonic theory of change and of the
passages from the Laws has been challenged, I wish to add some further
comments, especially on the two passages (1) Laws, 904c, f, and (2) 797d.
(1) The passage Laws, 904c, ‘the less significant is the beginning decline in
their level of rank’ may be translated more literally ‘the less significant is the
beginning movement down in the level of rank’. It seems to me certain, from the
context, that ‘down the level of rank’ is meant rather than ‘as to level of rank’,
which clearly is also a possible translation. (My reason is not only the whole
dramatic context, down from 904a, but also more especially the series ‘kata ...
kata ... katō’ which, in a passage of gathering momentum, must colour the
meaning of at least the second ‘kata’.—Concerning the word I translate by
‘level’, this may, admittedly, mean not only ‘plane’ but also ‘surface’; and the
word I translate by ‘rank’ may mean ‘space’; yet Bury’s translation: ‘the smaller
the change of character, the less is the movement over surface in space’ does not
seem to me to yield much meaning in this context.)
(2) The continuation of this passage (Laws, 798) is most characteristic. It
demands that ‘the lawgiver must contrive, by whatever means at his disposal
(‘by hook or by crook’, as Bury well translates), a method which ensures for his
state that the whole soul of every one of its citizens will, from reverence and
fear, resist any change of any of the things that are established of old’. (Plato
includes, explicitly, things which other lawgivers consider ‘mere matters of
play’—such, as, for example, changes in the games of children.)
(3) In general, the main evidence for my interpretation of Plato’s theory of
change—apart from a great number of minor passages referred to in the various
notes in this chapter and the preceding one—is of course found in the historical
or evolutionary passages of all the dialogues which contain such passages,
especially the Republic (the decline and fall of the state from its near-perfect or
Golden Age in Books VIII and IX), the Statesman (the theory of the Golden Age
and its decline), the Laws (the story of the primitive patriarchy and of the Dorian
conquest, and the story of the decline and fall of the Persian Empire), the
Timaeus (the story of evolution by degeneration, which occurs twice, and the
story of the Golden Age of Athens, which is continued in the Critias).
To this evidence Plato’s frequent references to Hesiod must be added, and
the undoubted fact that Plato’s synthetic mind was not less keen than that of
Empedocles (whose period of strife is the one ruling now; cp. Aristotle, De Gen.

et Con., 334a, b) in conceiving human affairs in a cosmic setting (Statesman,
Timaeus’).
(4) Ultimately, I may perhaps refer to general psychological considerations.
On the one hand the fear of innovation (illustrated by many passages in the
Laws, e.g. 758c/d) and, on the other hand, the idealization of the past (such as
found in Hesiod or in the story of the lost paradise) are frequent and striking
phenomena. It is perhaps not too far-fetched to connect the latter, or even both,
with the idealization of one’s childhood—one’s home, one’s parents, and with
the nostalgic wish to return to these early stages of one’s life, to one’s origin.
There are many passages in Plato in which he takes it for granted that the
original state of affairs, or original nature, is a state of blessedness. I refer only
to the speech of Aristophanes in the Symposium; here it is taken for granted that
the urge and the suffering of passionate love is sufficiently explained if it is
shown that it derives from this nostalgia, and similarly, that the feelings of
sexual gratification can be explained as those of a gratified nostalgia. Thus Plato
says of Eros (Symposium, 193d): ‘He will restore us to our original nature (see
also 191d) and heal us and make us happy and blessed.’ The same thought
underlies many remarks such as the following from the Philebus (16c): ‘The
men of old .. were better than we are now, and .. lived nearer to the gods ..’ All
this indicates the view that our unhappy and unblessed state is a consequence of
the development which makes us different from our original nature—our Idea;
and it further indicates that the development is one from a state of goodness and
blessedness to a state where goodness and blessedness are being lost; but this
means that the development is one of increasing corruption. Plato’s theory of
anamnesis—the theory that all knowledge is re-cognition or re-collection of the
knowledge we had in our pre-natal past is part of the same view: in the past
there resides not only the good, the noble, and the beautiful, but also all wisdom.
Even the ancient change or motion is better than secondary motion; for in the
Laws the soul is said to be (891b) ‘the starting point of all motions the first to
arise in things at rest .. the most ancient and potent motion’, and (966e) ‘the
most ancient and divine of all things’. (Cp. note 15 (8) to chapter 3.)
As pointed out before (cp. especially note 6 to chapter 3), the doctrine of an
historical and cosmic tendency towards decay appears to be combined, in Plato,
with a doctrine of an historical and cosmic cycle. (The period of decay,
probably, is a part of this cycle.) *
4
Cp. Timaeus, 91d-92b/c. See also note 6 (7) to chapter 3 and note 11 to
chapter 11.
5
See the beginning of chapter 2 above, and note 6 (1) to chapter 3. It is not
a mere accident that Plato mentions Hesiod’s story of ‘metals’ when discussing
his own theory of historical decay (Rep., 546e/547a, esp. notes 39 and 40 to
chapter 5); he clearly wishes to indicate how well his theory fits in with, and
explains, that of Hesiod.
6
The historical part of the Laws is in Books Three and Four (see note 6 (5)
and (8) to chapter 3). The two quotations in the text are from the beginning of
this part, i.e. Laws, 676a. For the parallel passages mentioned, see Republic,
369b, f. (‘The birth of a city ..’) and 545d (‘How will our city be changed ..’).
It is often said that the Laws (and the Statesman) are less hostile towards
democracy than the Republic, and it must be admitted that Plato’s general tone is
in fact less hostile (this is perhaps due to the increasing inner strength of
democracy; see chapter 10 and the beginning of chapter 11). But the only

practical concession made to democracy in the Laws is that political officers are
to be elected, by the members of the ruling (i.e. the military) class; and since all
important changes in the laws of the state are forbidden anyway (cp., for
instance, the quotations in note 3 of this chapter), this does not mean very much.
The fundamental tendency remains pro-Spartan, and this tendency was, as can
be seen from Aristotle’s Politics, 11, 6, 17 (1265b), compatible with a so-called
‘mixed’ constitution. In fact, Plato in the Laws is, if anything, more hostile
towards the spirit of democracy, i.e. towards the idea of the freedom of the
individual, than he is in the Republic; cp. especially the text to notes 32 and 33
to chapter 6 (i.e. Laws, 739c, ff., and 942a, f.) and to notes 19-22 to chapter 8
(i.e. Laws, 903c-909a).—See also next note.
7
It seems likely that it was largely this difficulty of explaining the first
change (or the Fall of Man) that led Plato to transform his theory of Ideas, as
mentioned in note 15 (8) to chapter 3; viz., to transform the Ideas into causes
and active powers, capable of mingling with some of the other Ideas (cp.
Sophist, 252e, ff.), and of rejecting the remaining ones (Sophist, 223c), and thus
to transform them into something like gods, as opposed to the Republic which
(cp. 380d) petrifies even the gods into unmoving and unmoved Parmenidean
beings. An important turning point is, apparently, the Sophist, 248e-249c (note
especially that here the Idea of motion is not at rest). The transformation seems
to solve at the same time the difficulty of the so-called ‘third man’; for if the
Forms are, as in the Timaeus, fathers, then there is no ‘third man’ necessary to
explain their similarity to their offspring.
Regarding the relation of the Republic to the Statesman and to the Laws, I
think that Plato’s attempt in the two latter dialogues to trace the origin of human
society further and further back is likewise connected with the difficulties
inherent in the problem of the first change. That it is difficult to conceive of a
change overtaking a perfect city is clearly stated in Republic, 546a; Plato’s
attempt in the Republic to solve it will be discussed in the next chapter (cp. text
to notes 37-40 to chapter 5). In the Statesman, Plato adopts the theory of a
cosmic catastrophe which leads to the change from the (Empedoclean) halfcircle of love to the present period, the half-circle of strife. This idea seems to
have been dropped in the Timaeus, in order to be replaced by a theory (retained
in the Laws) of more limited catastrophes, such as floods, which may destroy
civilizations, but apparently do not affect the course of the universe. (It is
possible that this solution of the problem was suggested to Plato by the fact that
in 373-372 B.C. the ancient city of Helice was destroyed by earthquake and
flood.) The earliest form of society, removed in the Republic only by one single
step from the still existing Spartan state, is thrust back to a more and more
distant past. Although Plato continues to believe that the first settlement must be
the best city, he now discusses societies prior to the first settlement, i.e. nomad
societies, ‘hill shepherds’. (Cp. especially note 32 to this chapter.)
8
The quotation is from Marx-Engels, The Communist Manifesto; cp. A
Handbook of Marxism (edited by E. Burns, 1935), 22.
9
The quotation is from Adam’s comments on Book VIII of the Republic;
see his edition, vol. II, 198, note to 544a3.
10
Cp. Republic, 544c.
11
(1) As opposed to my contention that Plato, like many modern
sociologists since Comte, tries to outline the typical stages of social
development, most critics take Plato’s story merely as a somewhat dramatic

presentation of a purely logical classification of constitutions. But this not only
contradicts what Plato says (cp. Adam’s note to Rep., 544c19, op. cit., vol. II,
199), but it is also against the whole spirit of Plato’s logic, according to which
the essence of a thing is to be understood by its original nature, i.e. by its
historical origin. And we must not forget that he uses the same word, ‘genus’, to
mean a class in the logical sense and a race in the biological sense. The logical
‘genus’ is still identical with the ‘race’, in the sense of ‘offspring of the same
parent’. (With this, cp. notes 15-20 to chapter 3, and text, as well as notes 23-24
to chapter 5, and text, where the equation nature = origin = race is discussed.)
Accordingly, there is every reason for taking what Plato says at its face value;
for even if Adam were right when he says (loc. cit.) that Plato intends to give a
‘logical order’, this order would for him be at the same time that of a typical
historical development. Adam’s remark (loc. cit.) that the order ‘is primarily
determined by psychological and not by historical considerations’ turns, I
believe, against him. For he himself points out (for instance, op. cit., vol. II, 195,
note to 543a, ff.) that Plato ‘retains throughout .. the analogy between the Soul
and the City’. According to Plato’s political theory of the soul (which will be
discussed in the next chapter), the psychological history must run parallel to the
social history, and the alleged opposition between psychological and historical
considerations disappears, turning into another argument in favour of our
interpretation.
(2) Exactly the same reply could be made if somebody should argue that
Plato’s order of the constitution is, fundamentally, not a logical but an ethical
one; for the ethical order (and the aesthetic order as well) is, in Plato’s
philosophy, indistinguishable from the historical order. In this connection, it
may be remarked that this historicist view provides Plato with a theoretical
background for Socrates’ eudemonism. i.e. for the theory that goodness and
happiness are identical. This theory is developed, in the Republic (cp. especially
580b), in the form of the doctrine that goodness and happiness, or badness and
unhappiness, are proportional; and so they must be, if the degree of the goodness
as well as of the happiness of a man is to be measured by the degree in which he
resembles our original blessed nature—the perfect Idea of man. (The fact that
Plato’s theory leads, in this point, to a theoretical justification of an apparently
paradoxical Socratic doctrine may well have helped Plato to convince himself
that he was only expounding the true Socratic creed; see text to notes 56/57 to
chapter 10.)
(3) Rousseau took over Plato’s classification of institutions (Social
Contract, Book II, ch. VII, Book III, ch. III ff., cp. also ch. X). It seems however
that he was not directly influenced by Plato when he revived the Platonic Idea of
a primitive society (cp., however, notes 1 to chapter 6 and 14 to chapter 9); but a
direct product of the Platonic Renaissance in Italy was Sanazzaro’s most
influential Arcadia, with its revival of Plato’s idea of a blessed primitive society
of Greek (Dorian) hill shepherds. (For this idea of Plato’s, cp. text to note 32 to
this chapter.) Thus Romanticism (cp. also chapter 9) is historically indeed an
offspring of Platonism.
(4) How far the modern historicism of Comte and Mill, and of Hegel and
Marx, is influenced by the theistic historicism of Giambattista Vico’s New
Science (1725) is very hard to say: Vico himself was undoubtedly influenced by
Plato, as well as by St. Augustine’s De Civitate Dei and Machiavelli’s
Discourses on Livy. Like Plato (cp. ch. 5), Vico identified the ‘nature’ of a thing

with its ‘origin’ (cp. Opere, Ferrari’s second ed., 1852-4, vol. V, p. 99); and he
believed that all nations must pass through the same course of development,
according to one universal law. His ‘nations’ (like Hegel’s) may thus be said to
be one of the links between Plato’s ‘Cities’ and Toynbee’s ‘Civilizations’.
12
Cp. Republic, 549c/d; the next quotations are op. cit., 550d-e, and later,
op. cit., 551a/b.
13
Cp. op. cit., 556e. (This passage should be compared with Thucydides,
III, 82-4, quoted in chapter 10, text to note 12.) The next quotation is op. cit.,
557a.
14
For Pericles’ democratic programme, see text to note 31, chapter 10, note
17 to chapter 6, and note 34 to chapter 10.
15
Adam, in his edition of The Republic of Plato, vol. II, 240, note to
559d22. (The italics in the second quotation are mine.) Adam admits that’ the
picture is doubtless somewhat exaggerated’; but he leaves little doubt that he
thinks it is, fundamentally, true ‘for all time’.
16
Adam, loc. cit.
17
This quotation is from Republic, 560d (for this and the next quotation, cp.
Lindsay’s translation); the next two quotations are from the same work, 563 a-b,
and d. (See also Adam’s note to 563d25.) It is significant that Plato appeals here
to the institution of private property, severely attacked in other parts of the
Republic, as if it were an unchallenged principle, of justice. It seems that when
the property bought is a slave, an appeal to the lawful right of the buyer is
adequate.
Another attack upon democracy is that ‘it tramples under foot’ the
educational principle that ‘no one can grow up to be a good man unless his
earliest years were given to noble games’. (Rep., 558b; see Lindsay’s
translation; cp. note 68 to chapter 10.) See also the attacks upon equalitarianism
quoted in note 14 to chapter 6.
* For Socrates’ attitude towards his young companions see most of the
earlier dialogues, but also the Phaedo, where Socrates’ ‘pleasant, kind, and
respectful manner in which he listened to the young man’s criticism’ is
described. For Plato’s contrasting attitude, see text to notes 19-21 to chapter 7;
see also the excellent lectures by H. Cherniss, The Riddle of the Early Academy
(1945), especially pp. 70 and 79 (on the Parmenides 1135c-d), and cp. notes 1821 to chapter 7, and text.
18
Slavery (see the preceding note) and the Athenian movement against it
will be further discussed in chapters 5 (notes 13 and text), 10, and 11; see also
note 29 to the present chapter. Like Plato, Aristotle (e.g. in Pol., 1313b11,
1319b20; and in his Constitution of Athens, 59, 5) testifies to Athens’ liberality
towards slaves; and so does the Pseudo-Xenophon (cp. his Const. of Athens, I,
10 f.)
19
Cp. Republic, 577a, f.; see Adam’s notes to 577a5 and b12 (op. cit., vol.
II, 332 f.). See now also the Addendum III (Reply to a Critic), below, especially
pp. 330 f.
20
Republic, 566e; cp. note 63 to chapter 10.
21
Cp. Statesman (Politicus), 301c/d. Although Plato distinguishes six types
of debased states, he does not introduce any new terms; the names ‘monarchy’
(or ‘kingship’) and ‘aristocracy’ are used in the Republic (445d) of the best state
itself, and not of the relatively best forms of debased states, as in the Statesman.
22
Cp. Republic, 544d.

23

Cp. Statesman, 297c/d: ‘If the government I have mentioned is the only
true original, then the others’ (which are ‘only copies of this’; cp. 297b/c) ‘must
use its laws, and write them down; this is the only way in which they can be
preserved’. (Cp. note 3 to this chapter, and note 18 to chapter 7.) ‘And any
violation of the laws should be punished with death, and the most severe
punishments; and this is very just and good, although, of course, only the second
best thing.’ (For the origin of the laws, cp. note 32 (1, a) to this chapter, and note
17 (2) to chapter 3.) And in 300e/301a, f., we read: ‘The nearest approach of
these lower forms of government to the true government .. is to follow these
written laws and customs ... When the rich rule and imitate the true Form, then
the government is called aristocracy; and when they do not heed the (ancient)
laws oligarchy,’ etc. It is important to note that not lawfulness or lawlessness in
the abstract, but the preservation of the ancient institutions of the original or
perfect state is the criterion of the classification. (This is in contrast to
Aristotle’s Politics, 1292a, where the main distinction is whether or not ‘the law
is supreme’, or, for instance, the mob.)
24
The passage, Laws, 709e-714a, contains several allusions to the
Statesman; for instance, 710d-e, which introduces, following Herodotus III, 8082, the number of rulers as the principle of classification; the enumerations of
the forms of government in 712c and d; and 713b, ff., i.e. the myth of the perfect
state in the day of Cronos, ‘of which the best of our present states are
imitations’. In view of these allusions, I little doubt that Plato intended his
theory of the fitness of tyranny for Utopian experiments to be understood as a
kind of continuation of the story of the Statesman (and thus also of the
Republic).—The quotations in this paragraph are from the Laws, 709e, and
710c/d; the ‘remark from the Laws quoted above’ is 797d, quoted in the text to
note 3, in this chapter. (I agree with E. B. England’s note to this passage, in his
edition of The Laws of Plato, 1921, vol. II, 258, that it is Plato’s principle that
‘change is detrimental to the power .. of anything’, and therefore also to the
power of evil; but I do not agree with him ‘that change from bad’, viz., to good,
is too self-evident to be mentioned as an exception; it is not self-evident from
the point of view of Plato’s doctrine of the evil nature of change. See also next
note.)
25
Cp. Laws, 676b/c (cp. 676a quoted in the text to note 6). In spite of
Plato’s doctrine that ‘change is detrimental’ (cp. the end of the last note), E. B.
England interprets these passages on change and revolution by giving them an
optimistic or progressive meaning. He suggests that the object of Plato’s search
is what ‘we might call “the secret of political vitality”’. (Cp. op. cit., vol. I, 344.)
And he interprets this passage on the search for the true cause of (detrimental)
change as dealing with a search for ‘the cause and nature of the true
development of a state, i.e. of its progress towards perfection’. (Italics his; cp.
vol. I, 345.) This interpretation cannot be correct, for the passage in question is
an introduction to a story of political decline; but it shows how much the
tendency to idealize Plato and to represent him as a progressivist blinds even
such an excellent critic to his own finding, namely, that Plato believed change to
be detrimental.
26
Cp. Republic, 545d (see also the parallel passage 465b. The next
quotation is from the Laws, 683e. (Adam in his edition of the Republic, vol. II,
203, note to 545d21, refers to this passage in the Laws.) England, in his edition
of the Laws, vol. I, 360 f., note to 683e5, mentions Republic, 609a, but neither

545d nor 465b and supposes that the reference is ‘to a previous discussion, or
one recorded in a lost dialogue’. I do not see why Plato should not be alluding to
the Republic, by using the fiction that some of its topics have been discussed by
the present interlocutors. As Cornford says, in Plato’s last group of dialogues
there is ‘no motive to keep up the illusion that the conversations had really taken
place’; and he is also right when he says that Plato ‘was not the slave of his own
fictions’. (Cp. Cornford, Plato’s Cosmology, pp. 5 and 4.) Plato’s law of
revolutions was rediscovered, without reference to Plato, by V. Pareto; cp. his
Treatise on General Sociology, §§ 2054, 2057, 2058. (At the end of § 2055,
there is also a theory of arresting history.) Rousseau also rediscovered the law.
(Social Contract, Book III, ch. X.)
27
(1) It may be worth noting that the intentionally non-historical traits of
the best state, especially the rule of the philosophers, are not mentioned by Plato
in the summary 3t the beginning of the Timaeus, and that in Book VIII of the
Republic he assumes that the rulers of the best state are not versed in
Pythagorean number-mysticism; cp. Republic, 546c/d, where the rulers are said
to be ignorant of these matters. (Cp. also the remark, Rep., 543d /544a,
according to which the best state of Book VIII can still be surpassed, namely, as
Adam says, by the city of Books V-VII—the ideal city in heaven.)
In his book, Plato’s Cosmology, pp. 6 ff., Cornford reconstructs the outlines
and contents of Plato’s unfinished trilogy, Timaeus—Critias—Hermocrates, and
shows how they are related to the historical parts of the Laws (Book III). This
reconstruction is, I think, a valuable corroboration of my theory that Plato’s
view of the world was fundamentally historical, and that his interest in ‘how it
generated’ (and how it decays) is linked with his theory of Ideas, and indeed
based on it. But if that is so, then there is no reason why we should assume that
the later books of the Republic ‘started from the question how it’ (i.e. the city)
‘might be realized in the future and sketched its possible decline through lower
forms of politics’ (Cornford, op. cit., 6; italics mine); instead we should look
upon the Books VIII and IX of the Republic, in view of their close parallelism
with the Third Book of the Laws, as a simplified historical sketch of the actual
decline of the ideal city of the past, and as an explanation of the origin of the
existing states, analogous to the greater task set by Plato for himself in the
Timaeus, in the unfinished trilogy, and in the Laws.
(2) In connection with my remark, later in the paragraph, that Plato
certainly knew that he did not possess the necessary data’, see for instance Laws,
683d, and England’s note to 683d2.
(3) To my remark, further down in the paragraph, that Plato recognized the
Cretan and Spartan societies as petrified or arrested forms (and to the remark in
the next paragraph that Plato’s best state is not only a class state but a caste
state) the following may be added. (Cp. also note 20 to this chapter, and 24 to
chapter 10.)
In Laws, 797d (in the introduction to the ‘important pronouncement’, as
England calls it, quoted in the text to note 3 to this chapter), Plato makes it
perfectly clear that his Cretan and Spartan interlocutors are aware of the
‘arrested’ character of their social institutions; Clenias, the Cretan interlocutor,
emphasizes that he is anxious to listen to any defence of the archaic character of
a state. A little later (799a), and in the same context, a direct reference is made
to the Egyptian method of arresting the development of institutions; surely a

clear indication that Plato recognized a tendency in Crete and Sparta parallel to
that of Egypt, namely, to arrest all social change.
In this context, a passage in the Timaeus (see especially 24a-b) seems
important. In this passage, Plato tries to show (a) that a class division very
similar to that of the Republic was established in Athens at a very ancient period
of its pre-historical development, and (b) that these institutions were closely akin
to the caste system of Egypt (whose arrested caste institutions he assumes to
have derived from his ancient Athenian state). Thus Plato himself acknowledges
by implication that the ideal ancient and perfect state of the Republic is a caste
state. It is interesting that Crantor, first commentator on the Timaeus, reports,
only two generations after Plato, that Plato had been accused of deserting the
Athenian tradition, and of becoming a disciple of the Egyptians. (Cp. Gomperz,
Greek Thinkers, Germ, ed., II, 476.) Crantor alludes perhaps to Isocrates’
Busiris, 8, quoted in note 3 to chapter 13.
For the problem of the castes in the Republic, see furthermore notes 31 and
32 (1, d) to this chapter, note 40 to chapter 6, and notes 11-14 to chapter 8. A. E.
Taylor, Plato: The Man and His Work, p. 269 f., forcefully denounces the view
that Plato favoured a caste state.
28
Cp. Republic, 416a. The problem is considered more fully in this chapter,
text to note 35. (For the problem of caste, mentioned in the next paragraph, see
notes 27 (3) and 31 to this chapter.)
29
For Plato’s advice against legislating for the common people with their
‘vulgar market quarrels’, etc., see Republic, 425b-427a/b; especially 425d-e and
427a. These passages, of course, attack Athenian democracy, and all ‘piecemeal’
legislation in the sense of chapter 9. * That this is so is also seen by Cornford,
The Republic of Plato (1941); for he writes, in a note to a passage in which Plato
recommends Utopian engineering (it is Republic 500d, f., the recommendation
of ‘canvas-cleaning’ and of a romantic radicalism; cp. note 12 to chapter 9, and
text): ‘Contrast the piecemeal tinkering at reform satirized at 425e ..’. Cornford
does not seem to like piecemeal reforms, and he seems to prefer Plato’s
methods; but his and my interpretation of Plato’s intentions seem to coincide.*
The four quotations further down in this paragraph are from the Republic,
371d/e; 463a-b (‘supporters’ and ‘employers’); 549a; and 471b/c. Adam
comments (op. cit., vol. I. 97, note to 371e32): ‘Plato does not admit slave
labour in his city, unless perhaps in the persons of barbarians.’ I agree that Plato
opposes in the Republic (469b-470c) the enslavement of Greek prisoners of war;
but he goes on (in 471b-c) to encourage that of barbarians by Greeks, and
especially by the citizens of his best city. (This appears to be also the opinion of
Tarn; cp. note 13 (2) to chapter 15.) And Plato violently attacked the Athenian
movement against slavery, and insisted on the legal rights of property when the
property was a slave (cp. text to notes 17 and 18 to this chapter). As is shown
also by the third quotation (from Rep., 548e/549a) in the paragraph to which this
note is appended, he did not abolish slavery in his best city. (See also Rep.,
590c/d, where he defends the demand that the coarse and vulgar should be the
slaves of the best man.) A. E. Taylor is therefore wrong when he twice asserts
(in his Plato, 1908 and 1914, pp. 197 and 118) that Plato implies ‘that there is
no class of slaves in the community’. For similar views in Taylor’s Plato: The
Man and His Work (1926), cp. end of note 27 to this chapter.
Plato’s treatment of slavery in the Statesman throws, I think, much light on
his attitude in the Republic. For here, too, he does not speak much about slaves,

although he clearly assumes that there are slaves in his state. (See his
characteristic remark, 289b/c, that ‘all property in tame animals, except slaves’
has been already dealt with; and a similarly characteristic remark, 309a, that true
kingscraft ‘makes slaves of those who wallow in ignorance and abject humility’.
The reason why Plato does not say very much about the slaves is quite clear
from 289c, ff., especially 289d/e. He does not see a major distinction between
‘slaves and other servants’, such as labourers, tradesmen, merchants (i.e. all
‘banausic’ persons who earn money; cp. note 4 to chapter 11); slaves are
distinguished from the others merely as ‘servants acquired by purchase’. In other
words, he is so high above the baseborn that it is hardly worth his while to
bother about subtle differences. All this is very similar to the Republic, only a
little more explicit. (See also note 57 (2) to chapter 8.)
For Plato’s treatment of slavery in the Laws, see especially G. R. Morrow,
‘Plato and Greek Slavery’ (Mind, N.S., vol. 48, 186-201; see also p. 402), an
article which gives an excellent and critical survey of the subject, and reaches a
very just conclusion, although the author is, in my opinion, still a little biased in
favour of Plato. (The article does not perhaps sufficiently stress the fact that in
Plato’s day an anti-slavery movement was well on the way; cp. note 13 to
chapter 5.)
30
The quotation is from Plato’s summary of the Republic in the Timaeus
(18c/d).—With the remark concerning the lack of novelty of the suggested
community of women and children, compare Adam’s edition of The Republic of
Plato, vol. I, p. 292 (note to 457b, ff.) and p. 308 (note to 463c17), as well as pp.
345-55, esp. 354; with the Pythagorean element in Plato’s communism, cp. op.
cit., p. 199, note to 416d22. (For the precious metals, see note 24 to chapter 10.
For the common meals, see note 34 to chapter 6; and for the communist
principle in Plato and his successors, note 29 (2) to chapter 5, and the passages
mentioned there.)
31
The passage quoted is from Republic, 434b/c. In demanding a caste state,
Plato hesitates for a long time. This is quite apart from the ‘lengthy preface’ to
the passage in question (which will be discussed in chapter 6; cp. notes 24 and
40 to that chapter); for when first speaking about these matters, in 415a, ff., he
speaks as though a rise from the lower to the upper classes were permissible,
provided that in the lower classes ‘children were born with an admixture of gold
and silver’ (415c), i.e. of upper class blood and virtue. But in 434b-d, and, even
more clearly, in 547a, this permission is, in effect, withdrawn; and in 547a any
admixture of the metals is declared an impurity which must be fatal to the state.
See also text to notes 11-14 to chapter 8 (and note 27 (3) to the present chapter).
32
Cp. the Statesman, 271e. The passages in the Laws about the primitive
nomadic shepherds and their patriarchs are 677e-680e. The passage quoted is
Laws, 680e. The passage quoted next is from the Myth of the Earthborn,
Republic, 415d/e. The concluding quotation of the paragraph is from Republic,
440d.—It may be necessary to add some comments on certain remarks in the
paragraph to which this note is appended.
(1) It is stated in the text that it is not very clearly explained how the
‘settlement’ came about. Both in the Laws and in the Republic we first hear (see
(a) and (c), below) of a kind of agreement or social contract (for the social
contract, cp. note 29 to chapter 5 and notes 43-54 to chapter 6, and text), and
later (see (b) and (c), below) of a forceful subjugation.

(a) In the Laws, the various tribes of hill shepherds settle in the plains after
having joined together to form larger war bands whose laws are arrived at by an
agreement or contract, made by arbiters vested with royal powers (681b and c/d;
for the origin of the laws described in 681b, cp. note 17 (2) to chapter 3). But
now Plato becomes evasive. Instead of describing how these bands settle in
Greece, and how the Greek cities were founded, Plato switches over to Homer’s
story of the foundation of Troy, and to the Trojan war. From there, Plato says,
the Achaeans returned under the name of Dorians, and ‘the rest of the story .. is
part of Lacedaemonian history’ (682e) ‘for we have reached the settlement of
Lacedaemon’ (682e/683a). So far we have heard nothing about the manner of
this settlement, and there follows at once a further digression (Plato himself
speaks about the ‘roundabout track of the argument’) until we get ultimately (in
683c/d) the ‘hint’ mentioned in the text; see (b).
(b) The statement in the text that we get a hint that the Dorian ‘settlement’
in the Peloponnese was in fact a violent subjugation, refers to the Laws (683c/d),
where Plato introduces what are actually his first historical remarks on Sparta.
He says that he begins at the time when the whole of the Peloponnese was
‘practically subjugated’ by the Dorians. In the Menexenus (whose genuineness
can hardly be doubted; cp. note 35 to chapter 10) there is in 245c an allusion to
the fact that the Peloponnesians were ‘immigrants from abroad’ (as Grote puts
it: cp. his Plato, III, p. 5).
(c) In the Republic (369b) the city is founded by workers with a view to the
advantages of a division of labour and of co-operation, in accordance with the
contract theory.
(d) But later (in Rep., 415d/e; see the quotation in the text, to this
paragraph) we get a description of the triumphant invasion of a warrior class of
somewhat mysterious origin—the ‘earthborn’. The decisive passage of this
description states that the earthborn must look round to find for their camp the
most suitable spot (literally) ‘for keeping down those within’, i.e. for keeping
down those already living in the city, i.e. for keeping down the inhabitants.
(e) In the Statesman (271a, f.) these ‘earthborn’ are identified with the very
early nomad hill shepherds of the pre-settlement period. Cp. also the allusion to
the autochthonous grasshoppers in the Symposium, 191b; cp. note 6 (4) to
chapter 3, and 11 (2) to chapter 8.
(f) To sum up, it seems that Plato had a fairly clear idea of the Dorian
conquest, which he preferred, for obvious reasons, to veil in mystery. It also
seems that there was a tradition that the conquering war hordes were of nomad
descent.
(2) With the remark later in the text in this paragraph regarding Plato’s
‘continuous emphasis’ on the fact that ruling is shepherding, cp., for instance,
the following passages: Republic, 343b, where the idea is introduced; 345c, f.,
where, in the form of the simile of the good shepherd, it becomes one of the
central topics of the investigation; 375a-376b, 404a, 440d, 451b-e, 459a-460c,
and 466c-d (quoted in note 30 to chapter 5), where the auxiliaries are likened to
sheep-dogs and where their breeding and education are discussed accordingly;
416a, ff., where the problem of the wolves without and within the state is
introduced; cp. furthermore the Statesman, where the idea is continued over
many pages, especially 261d-276d. With regard to the Laws, I may refer to the
passage (694e), where Plato says of Cyrus that he had acquired for his sons

‘cattle and sheep and many herds of men and other animals’. (Cp. also Laws,
735, and Theaet., 174d.)
(3) With all this, cp. also A. J. Toynbee, A Study of History, esp. vol. III, pp.
32 (n. 1), where A. H. Lybyer, The Government of the Ottoman Empire, etc., is
quoted, 33 (n. 2), 50-100; see more especially his remark on the conquering
nomads (p. 22) who ‘deal with .. men’, and on Plato’s ‘human watchdogs’ (p.
94, n. 2). I have been much stimulated by Toynbee’s brilliant ideas and much
encouraged by many of his remarks which I take as corroborating my
interpretations, and which I can value the more highly the more Toynbee’s and
my fundamental assumptions seem to disagree. I also owe to Toynbee a number
of terms used in my text, especially ‘human cattle’, ‘human herd’ and ‘human
watch-dog’.
Toynbee’s Study of History is, from my point of view, a model of what I
call historicism; I need not say much more to express my fundamental
disagreement with it; and a number of special points of disagreement will be
discussed at various places (cp. notes 43 and 45 (2) to this chapter, notes 7 and 8
to chapter 10, and chapter 24; also, my criticism of Toynbee in chapter 24, and
in The Poverty of Historicism, p. 110 ff.). But it contains a wealth of interesting
and stimulating ideas. Regarding Plato, Toynbee emphasizes a number of points
in which I can follow him, especially that Plato’s best state is inspired by his
experience of social revolutions and by his wish to arrest all change, and that it
is a kind of arrested Sparta (which itself was also arrested). In spite of these
points of agreement, there is even in the interpretation of Plato a fundamental
disagreement between Toynbee’s views and my own. Toynbee regards Plato’s
best state as a typical (reactionary) Utopia, while I interpret its major part, in
connection with what I consider as Plato’s general theory of change, as an
attempt to reconstruct a primitive form of society. Nor do I think that Toynbee
would agree with my interpretation of Plato’s story of the period prior to the
settlement, and of the settlement itself, outlined in this note and the text; for
Toynbee says (op. cit., vol. III, 80) that ‘the Spartan society was not of nomadic
origin’. Toynbee strongly emphasizes (op. cit., III, 50 ff.) the peculiar character
of the Spartan society, which, he says, was arrested in its development owing to
a superhuman effort to keep down their ‘human cattle’. But I think that this
emphasis on the peculiar situation of Sparta makes it difficult to understand the
similarities between the institutions of Sparta and Crete which Plato found so
striking (Rep., 544c; Laws, 683a). These, I believe, can be explained only as
arrested forms of very ancient tribal institutions, which must be considerably
older than the effort of the Spartans in the second Messenian war (about 650620 B.C.; cp. Toynbee, op. cit., III, 53). Since the conditions of the survival of
these institutions were so very different in the two localities, their similarity is a
strong argument in favour of their being primitive and against an explanation by
a factor which affects only one of them.
* For problems of the Dorian Settlement, see also R. Eisler in Caucasia,
vol. V, 1928, especially p. 113, note 84, where the term ‘Hellenes’ is translated
as the ‘settlers’, and ‘Greeks’ as the ‘graziers’—i.e. the cattle-breeders or
nomads.
The
same
author
has
shown
(Orphisch-Dionisische
Mysteriengedanken, 1925, p. 58, note 2) that the idea of the God-Shepherd is of
Orphic origin. At the same place, the sheep-dogs of God (Domini Canes) are
mentioned.*

33

The fact that education is in Plato’s state a class prerogative has been
overlooked by some enthusiastic educationists who credit Plato with the idea of
making education independent of financial means; they do not see that the evil is
the class prerogative as such, and that it is comparatively unimportant whether
this prerogative is based upon the possession of money or upon any other
criterion by which membership of the ruling class is determined. Cp. notes 12
and 13 to chapter 7, and text. Concerning the carrying of arms, see also Laws,
753b.
34
Cp. Republic, 460c. (See also note 31 to this chapter.) Regarding Plato’s
recommendation of infanticide, see Adam, op. cit., vol. I, p. 299, note to 460c18.
and pp. 357 ff. Although Adam rightly insists that Plato was in favour of
infanticide, and although he rejects as ‘irrelevant’ all attempts ‘to acquit Plato of
sanctioning’ such a dreadful practice, he tries to excuse Plato by pointing out
‘that the practice was widely prevalent in ancient Greece’. But it was not so in
Athens. Plato chooses throughout to prefer the ancient Spartan barbarism and
racialism to the enlightenment of Pericles’ Athens; and for this choice he must
be held responsible. For a hypothesis explaining the Spartan practice, see note 7
to chapter 10 (and text); see also the cross references given there.
The later quotations in this paragraph which favour applying the principles
of animal breeding to man are from Republic, 459b (cp. note 39 to chapter 8,
and text); those on the analogy between dogs and warriors, etc., from the
Republic, 404a; 375a; 376a/b; and 376b. See also note 40 (2) to chapter 5, and
the next note here.
35
The two quotations before the note-number are both from Republic, 375b.
The next following quotation is from 416a (cp. note 28 to this chapter); the
remaining ones arc from 375c-e. The problem of blending opposite ‘natures’ (or
even Forms; cp. notes 18-20 and 40 (2) to chapter 5, and text and note 39 to
chapter 8) is one of Plato’s favourite topics. (In the Statesman, 283e, f., and later
in Aristotle, it merges into the doctrine of the mean.)
36
The quotations are from Republic, 410c; 410d; 410e; 411e/412a and
412b.
37
In the Laws (680b, ff.) Plato himself treats Crete with some irony because
of its barbarous ignorance of literature. This ignorance extends even to Homer,
whom the Cretan interlocutor does not know, and of whom he says: ‘foreign
poets are very little read by Cretans’. (‘But they are read in Sparta’, rejoins the
Spartan interlocutor.) For Plato’s preference for Spartan customs, see also note
34 to chapter 6, and the text to note 30 to the present chapter.
38
For Plato’s view on Sparta’s treatment of the human cattle, see note 29 to
this chapter, Republic, 548e/549a, where the timocratic man is compared with
Plato’s brother Glaucon: ‘He would be harder’ (than Glaucon) ‘and less
musical’; the continuation of this passage is quoted in the text to note 29.—
Thucydides reports (IV, 80) the treacherous murder of the 2,000 helots; the best
of the helots were selected for death by a promise of freedom. It is almost
certain that Plato knew Thucydides well, and we can be sure that he had in
addition more direct sources of information.
For Plato’s views on Athens’ slack treatment of slaves, see note 18 to this
chapter.
39
Considering the decidedly anti-Athenian and therefore anti-literary
tendency of the Republic, it is a little difficult to explain why so many
educationists are so enthusiastic about Plato’s educational theories. I can see

only three likely explanations. Either they do not understand the Republic, in
spite of its most outspoken hostility towards the then existing Athenian literary
education; or they are simply flattered by Plato’s rhetorical emphasis upon the
political power of education, just as so many philosophers are, and even some
musicians (see text to note 41); or both.
It is also difficult to see how lovers of Greek art and literature can find
encouragement in Plato, who, especially in the Tenth Book of the Republic,
launched a most violent attack against all poets and tragedians, and especially
against Homer (and even Hesiod). See Republic, 600a, where Homer is put
below the level of a good technician or mechanic (who would be generally
despised by Plato as banausic and depraved; cp. Rep., 495e and 590c, and note 4
to chapter 11); Republic, 600c, where Homer is put below the level of the
Sophists Protagoras and Prodicus (see also Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, German
ed., II, 401); and Republic, 605a/b, where poets are bluntly forbidden to enter
into any well-governed city.
These clear expressions of Plato’s attitude, however, are usually passed
over by the commentators, who dwell, on the other hand, on remarks like the
one made by Plato in preparing his attack on Homer (‘.. though love and
admiration for Homer hardly allow me to say what I have to say’; Rep., 595b).
Adam comments on this (note to 595b11) by saying that ‘Plato speaks with real
feeling’; but I think that Plato’s remark only illustrates a method fairly generally
adopted in the Republic, namely, that of making some concession to the reader’s
sentiments (cp. chapter 10, especially text to note 65) before the main attack
upon humanitarian ideas is launched.
40
For the rigid censorship aimed at class discipline, see Republic, 377e, ff.,
and especially 378a: ‘Those who are to be the guardians of our city ought to
consider it the most pernicious crime to quarrel easily with one another.’ It is
interesting that Plato does not state this political principle at once, when
introducing his theory of censorship in 376e, ff., but that he speaks first only of
truth, beauty, etc. The censorship is further tightened up in 595a, ff., especially
605a/b (see the foregoing note, and notes 18-22 to chapter 7, and text). For the
role of censorship in the Laws, see 801c/d.—See also the next note.
For Plato’s forgetfulness of his principle (Rep., 410c-412b, see note 36 to
this chapter) that music has to strengthen the gentle element in man as opposed
to the fierce, see especially 399a, f., where modes of music are demanded which
do not make men soft, but are ‘fit for men who are warriors’. Cp. also the next
note, (2).—It must be made clear that Plato has not ‘forgotten’ a previously
announced principle, but only that principle to which his discussion is going to
lead up.
41
(1) For Plato’s attitude towards music, especially music proper, see, for
instance, Republic, 397b, ff.; 398e, ff.; 400a, ff.; 410b, 424b, f., 546d. Laws,
657e, ff.; 673a, 700b, ff., 798d, ff., 801d, ff., 802b, ff., 816c. His attitude is,
fundamentally, that one must ‘beware of changing to a new mode of music; this
endangers everything’ since ‘any change in the style of music always leads to a
change in the most important institutions of the whole state. So says Damon, and
I believe him.’ (Rep., 424c.) Plato, as usual, follows the Spartan example. Adam
(op. cit., vol. I, p. 216, note to 424c20; italics mine; cp. also his references) says
that ‘the connection between musical and political changes .. was recognized
universally throughout Greece, and particularly at Sparta, where .. Timotheus
had his lyre confiscated for adding to it four new strings’. That Sparta’s

procedure inspired Plato cannot be doubted; its universal recognition throughout
Greece, and especially in Periclean Athens, is most improbable. (Cp. (a) of this
note.)
(2) In the text I have called Plato’s attitude towards music (cp. especially
Rep., 398e, ff.) superstitious and backward if compared with ‘a more
enlightened contemporary criticism’. The criticism I have in mind is that of the
anonymous writer, probably a musician of the fifth (or the early fourth) century,
the author of an address (possibly an Olympian oration) which is now known as
the thirteenth piece of Grenfell and Hunt, The Hibeh Papyri, 1906, pp. 45 ff. It
seems possible that the writer is one of the various musicians who criticize
Socrates’ (i.e. the ‘Socrates’ of Plato’s Republic), mentioned by Aristotle (in the
equally superstitious passage of his Politics, 1342b, where he repeats most of
Plato’s arguments); but the criticism of the anonymous author goes much further
than Aristotle indicates. Plato (and Aristotle) believed that certain musical
modes, for instance, the ‘slack’ Ionian and Lydian modes, people soft and
effeminate, while others, especially the Dorian mode, them brave. This view is
attacked by the anonymous author. ‘They say’, he writes, ‘that some modes
produce temperate and others just men; others, again, heroes, and others
cowards.’ He brilliantly exposes the silliness of this view by pointing out that
some of the most war-like of the Greek tribes use modes reputed to produce
cowards, while certain professional (opera) singers habitually sing in the
‘heroic’ mode without ever showing signs of becoming heroes. This criticism
might have been directed against the Athenian musician Damon, often quoted by
Plato as an authority, a friend of Pericles (who was liberal enough to tolerate a
pro-Spartan attitude in the field of artistic criticism). But it might easily have
been directed against Plato himself. For Damon, see Diels5; for a hypothesis
concerning the anonymous author, see ibid., vol. II, p. 334, note.
(3) In view of the fact that I am attacking a ‘reactionary’ attitude towards
music, I may perhaps remark that my attack is in no way inspired by a personal
sympathy for ‘progress’ in music. In fact, I happen to like old music (the older
the better) and to dislike modern music intensely (especially most works written
since the day when Wagner began to write music). I am altogether against
‘futurism’, whether in the field of art or of morals (cp. chapter 22, and note 19 to
chapter 25.) But I am also against imposing one’s likes and dislikes upon others,
and against censorship in such matters. We can love and hate, especially in art,
without favouring legal measures for suppressing what we hate, or for
canonizing what we love.
42
Cp. Republic, 537a; and 466e-467e.
The characterization of modern totalitarian education is due to A. Kolnai,
The War against the West (1938), p. 318.
43
Plato’s remarkable theory that the state, i.e. centralized and organized
political power, originates through a conquest (the subjugation of a sedentary
agricultural population by nomads or hunters) was, as far as I know, first rediscovered (if we discount some remarks by Machiavelli) by Hume in his
criticism of the historical version of the contract theory (cp. his Essays, Moral,
Political, and Literary, vol. II, 1752, Essay XII, Of the Original Contract):—
‘Almost all the governments’, Hume writes, ‘which exist at present, or of which
there remains any record in story, have been founded originally, either on
usurpation or conquest, or both ..’ And he points out that for ‘an artful and bold
man .., it is often easy .., by employing sometimes violence, sometimes false

pretences, to establish his dominion over a people a hundred times more
numerous than his partizans ... By such arts as these, many governments have
been established; and this is all the original contract, which they have to boast
of.’ The theory was next revived by Renan, in What is a Nation? (1882), and by
Nietzsche in his Genealogy of Morals (1887); see the third German edition of
1894, p. 98. The latter writes of the origin of the ‘state’ (without reference to
Hume): ‘Some horde of blonde beasts, a conquering master race with a war-like
organization .. lay their terrifying paws heavily upon a population which is
perhaps immensely superior in—numbers ... This is the way in which the “state”
originates upon earth; I think that the sentimentality which lets it originate with
a “contract”, is dead.’ This theory appeals to Nietzsche because he likes these
blonde beasts. But it has also been proffered more recently by F. Oppenheimer
(The State, transl. Gitterman, 1914, p. 68); by a Marxist, K. Kautsky (in his book
on The Materialist Interpretation of History); and by W. C. Macleod (The
Origin and History of Politics, 1931). I think it very likely that something of the
kind described by Plato, Hume, and Nietzsche has happened in many, if not in
all, cases. I am speaking only about ‘states’ in the sense of organized and even
centralized political power.
I may mention that Toynbee has a very different theory. But before
discussing it, I wish first to make it clear that from the anti-historicist point of
view, the question is of no great importance. It is perhaps interesting in itself to
consider how ‘states’ originated, but it has no bearing whatever upon the
sociology of states, as I understand it, i.e. upon political technology (see
chapters 3, 9, and 25).
Toynbee’s theory does not confine itself to ‘states’ in the sense of organized
and centralized political power. He discusses, rather, the ‘origin of civilizations’.
But here begins the difficulty; for some of his ‘civilizations’ are states (as here
described), some are groups or sequences of states, and some are societies like
that of the Eskimos, which are not states; and if it is questionable whether
‘states’ originate according to one single scheme, then it must be even more
doubtful when we consider a class of such diverse social phenomena as the early
Egyptian and Mesopotamian states and their institutions and technique on the
one side, and the Eskimo way of living on the other.
But we may concentrate on Toynbee’s description (A Study of History, vol.
I, pp. 305 ff.) of the origin of the Egyptian and Mesopotamian ‘civilizations’.
His theory is that the challenge of a difficult jungle environment rouses a
response from ingenious and enterprising leaders; they lead their followers into
the valleys which they begin to cultivate, and found states. This (Hegelian and
Bergsonian) theory of the creative genius as a cultural and political leader
appears to me most romantic. If we take Egypt, then we must look, first of all,
for the origin of the caste system. This, I believe, is most likely the result of
conquests, just as in India where every new wave of conquerors imposed a new
caste upon the old ones. But there are other arguments. Toynbee himself favours
a theory which is probably correct, namely, that animal breeding and especially
animal training is a later, a more advanced and a more difficult stage of
development than mere agriculture, and that this advanced step is taken by the
nomads of the steppe. But in Egypt we find both agriculture and animal
breeding, and the same holds for most of the early ‘states’ (though not for all the
American ones, I gather). This seems to be a sign that these states contain a
nomadic element; and it seems only natural to venture the hypothesis that this

element is due to nomad invaders imposing their rule, a caste rule, upon the
original agricultural population. This theory disagrees with Toynbee’s
contention (op. cit., III, 23 f.) that nomad-built states usually wither away very
quickly. But the fact that many of the early caste states go in for the breeding of
animals has to be explained somehow.
The idea that nomads or even hunters constituted ‘the original upper class is
corroborated by the age-old and still surviving upper-class tradition according to
which war, hunting, and horses are the symbols of the leisured classes; a
tradition which formed the basis of Aristotle’s ethics and politics, and which is
still alive, as Veblen (The Theory of the Leisure Class) and Toynbee have
shown; and to this evidence we can perhaps add the animal breeder’s belief in
racialism, and especially in the racial superiority of the upper class. The latter
belief which is so pronounced in caste states and in Plato and in Aristotle is held
by Toynbee to be ‘one of the .. sins of our .. modern age’ and ‘something alien
from the Hellenic genius’ (op. cit., III, 93). But although many Greeks may have
developed beyond racialism, it seems likely that Plato’s and Aristotle’s theories
are based on old traditions; especially in view of the fact that racial ideas played
such a role in Sparta.
44
Cp. Laws, 694a-698a.
45
(1) Spengler’s Decline of the West is not in my opinion to be taken
seriously. But it is a symptom; it is the theory of one who believes in an upper
class which is facing defeat. Like Plato, Spengler tries to show that ‘the world’
is to be blamed, with its general law of decline and death. And like Plato, he
demands (in his sequel, Prussianism and Socialism) a new order, a desperate
experiment to stem the forces of history, a regeneration of the Prussian ruling
class by the adoption of a ‘socialism’ or communism, and of economic
abstinence.—Concerning Spengler, I largely agree with L. Nelson, who
published his criticism under a long ironical title whose beginning may be
translated: ‘Witchcraft: Being an Initiation into the Secrets of Oswald Spengler’s
Art of Fortune Telling, and a Most Evident Proof of the Irrefutable Truth of His
Soothsaying’, etc. I think that this is a just characterization of Spengler. Nelson,
I may add, was one of the first to oppose what I call historicism (following here
Kant in his criticism of Herder; cp. chapter 12, note 56).
(2) My remark that Spengler’s is not the last Decline and Fall is meant
especially as an allusion to Toynbee. Toynbee’s work is so superior to
Spengler’s that I hesitate to mention it in the same context; but the superiority is
due mainly to Toynbee’s wealth of ideas and to his superior knowledge (which
manifests itself in the fact that he does not, as Spengler docs, deal with
everything under the sun at the same time). But the aim and method of the
investigation is similar. It is most decidedly historicist. (Cp. my criticism of
Toynbee in The Poverty of Historicism, p. 110 ff.) And it is, fundamentally,
Hegelian (although I do not see that Toynbee is aware of this fact). His ‘criterion
of the growth of civilizations’ which is ‘progress towards self-determination’
shows this clearly enough; for Hegel’s law of progress towards ‘selfconsciousness’ and ‘freedom’ can be only too easily recognized. (Toynbee’s
Hegelianism seems to come somehow through Bradley, as may be seen, for
instance, by his remarks on relations, op. cit., III, 223: ‘The very concept of
“relations” between “things” or “beings” involves’ a ‘logical contradiction ...
How is this contradiction to be transcended?’ (I cannot enter here into a
discussion of the problem of relations. But I may state dogmatically that all

problems concerning relations can be reduced, by certain simple methods of
modern logic, to problems concerning properties, or classes; in other words,
peculiar philosophical difficulties concerning relations do not exist. The method
mentioned is due to N. Wiener and K. Kuratowski; see Quine, A System of
Logistic, 1934, pp. 16 ff.). Now I do not believe that to classify a work as
belonging to a certain school is to dismiss it; but in the case of Hegelian
historicism I think that it is so, for reasons to be discussed in the second volume
of this book.
Concerning Toynbee’s historicism, I wish to make it especially clear that I
doubt very much indeed whether civilizations are born, grow, break down, and
die. I am obliged to stress this point because I myself use some of the terms used
by Toynbee, in so far as I speak of the ‘breakdown’ and of the ‘arresting’ of
societies. But I wish to make it clear that my term ‘breakdown’ refers not to all
kinds of civilizations but to one particular kind of phenomenon—to the feeling
of bewilderment connected with the dissolution of the magical or tribal ‘closed
society’. Accordingly, I do not believe, as Toynbee does, that Greek society
suffered ‘its breakdown’ in the period of the Peloponnesian war; and I find the
symptoms of the breakdown which Toynbee describes much earlier. (Cp. with
this notes 6 and 8 to chapter 10, and text.) Regarding ‘arrested’ societies, I apply
this term exclusively, either to a society that clings to its magical forms through
closing itself up, by force, against the influence of an open society, or to a
society that attempts to return to the tribal cage.
Also I do not think that our Western civilization is just one member of a
species. I think that there are many closed societies who may suffer all kinds of
fates; but an ‘open society’ can, I suppose, only go on, or be arrested and forced
back into the cage, i.e. to the beasts. (Cp. also chapter 10, especially the last
note.)
(3) Regarding the Decline and Fall stories, I may mention that nearly all of
them stand under the influence of Heraclitus’ remark: ‘They fill their bellies like
the beasts’, and of Plato’s theory of the low animal instincts. I mean to say that
they all try to show that the decline is due to an adoption (by the ruling class) of
these ‘lower’ standards which are allegedly natural to the working classes. In
other words, and putting the matter crudely but bluntly, the theory is that
civilizations, like the Persian and the Roman empires, decline owing to
overfeeding. (Cp. note 19 to chapter 10.)

Notes To Chapter 5
1

The ‘charmed circle’ is a quotation from Burnet, Greek Philosophy, I, 106,
where similar problems are treated. I do not, however, agree with Burnet that ‘in
early days the regularity of human life had been far more clearly apprehended
than the even course of nature’. This presupposes the establishment of a
differentiation which, I believe, is characteristic of a later period, i.e. the period
of the dissolution of the ‘charmed circle of law and custom’. Moreover, natural
periods (the seasons, etc.; cp. note 6 to chapter 2, and Plato (?), Epinomis, 978d,
ff.) must have been apprehended in very early days.—For the distinction
between natural and normative laws, see esp. note 18 (4) to this chapter.
2
* Cp. R. Eisler, The Royal Art of Astrology. Eisler says that the
peculiarities of the movement of the planets were interpreted, by the Babylonian
‘tablet writers who produced the Library of Assurbanipal’ (op. cit., 288), as

‘dictated by the “laws” or “decisions” ruling “heaven and earth” (pirishtē shamē
u irsiti), pronounced by the creator god at the beginning.’ (ibid., 232 f.). And he
points out (ibid., 288) that the idea of ‘universal laws’ (of nature) originates with
this ‘mythological .. concept of .. “decrees of heaven and earth”...’*
For the passage from Heraclitus, cp. D5, B 29, and note 7 (2) to chapter 2;
also note 6 to that chapter, and text. See also Burnet, loc. cit., who gives a
different interpretation; he thinks that ‘when the regular course of nature began
to be observed, no better name could be found for it than Right or Justice ..
which properly meant the unchanging custom that guided human life.’ I do not
believe that the term meant first something social and was then extended, but I
think that both social and natural regularities (‘order’) were originally
undifferentiated, and interpreted as magical.
3
The opposition is expressed sometimes as one between ‘nature’ and ‘law’
(or ‘norm’ or ‘convention’), sometimes as one between ‘nature’ and the
‘positing’ or ‘laying down’ (viz., of normative laws), and sometimes as one
between ‘nature’ and ‘art’, or ‘natural’ and ‘artificial’.
The antithesis between nature and convention is often said (on the authority
of Diogenes Laertius, II, 16 and 4; Doxogr., 564b) to have been introduced by
Archelaus, who is said to have been the teacher of Socrates. But I think that, in
the Laws, 690b, Plato makes it clear enough that he considers ‘the Theban poet
Pindar’ to be the originator of the antithesis (cp. notes 10 and 28 to this chapter).
Apart from Pindar’s fragments (quoted by Plato; see also Herodotus, III, 38),
and some remarks by Herodotus (loc. cit.), one of the earliest original sources
preserved is the Sophist Antiphon’s fragments On Truth (see notes 11 and 12 to
this chapter). According to Plato’s Protagoras, the Sophist Hippias seems to
have been a pioneer of similar views (see note 13 to this chapter). But the most
influential early treatment of the problem seems to have been that of Protagoras
himself, although he may possibly have used a different terminology. (It may be
mentioned that Democritus dealt with the antithesis which he applied also to
such social ‘institutions’ as language; and Plato did the same in the Cratylus,
e.g. 384e.)
4
A very similar point of view can be found in Russell’s ‘A Free Man’s
Worship’ (in Mysticism and Logic) and in the last chapter of Sherrington’s Man
on His Nature.
6
(1) Positivists will reply, of course, that the reason why norms cannot be
derived from factual propositions is that norms are meaningless; but this shows
only that (with Wittgenstein’s Tractatus) they define ‘meaning’ arbitrarily in
such a way that only factual propositions are ‘meaningful’. (See also my The
Logic of Scientific Discovery, pp. 35 ff. and 51 f.) The followers of
‘psychologism’, on the other hand, will try to explain imperatives as expressions
of emotions, norms as habits, and standards as points of view. But although the
habit of not stealing certainly is a fact, it is necessary, as explained in the text, to
distinguish this fact from the corresponding norm.—On the question of the logic
of norms, I fully agree with most of die views expressed by K. Menger in his
book, Moral, Wille und Weltgestaltung, 1935. He is one of the first, I believe, to
develop the foundations of a logic of norms. I may perhaps express here my
opinion that the reluctance to admit that norms are something important and
irreducible is one of the main sources of the intellectual and other weaknesses of
the more ‘progressive’ circles in our present time.

(2) Concerning my contention that it is impossible to derive a sentence
stating a norm or decision from a sentence stating a fact, the following may be
added. In analysing the relations between sentences and facts, we are moving in
that field of logical inquiry which A. Tarski has called Semantics (cp. note 29 to
chapter 3 and note 23 to chapter 8). One of the fundamental concepts of
semantics is the concept of truth. As shown by Tarski, it is possible (within what
Carnap calls a semantical system) to derive a descriptive statement like
‘Napoleon died on St. Helena’ from the statement ‘Mr. A said that Napoleon
died on St. Helena’, in conjunction with the further statement that what Mr. A
said was true. (And if we use the term ‘fact’ in such a wide sense that we not
only speak about the fact described by a sentence but also about the fact that this
sentence is true, then we could even say that it is possible to derive ‘Napoleon
died on St. Helena’ from the two ‘facts’ that Mr. A said it, and that he spoke the
truth.) Now there is no reason why we should not proceed in an exactly
analogous fashion in the realm of norms. We might then introduce, in
correspondence to the concept of truth, the concept of the validity or rightness of
a norm. This would mean that a certain norm N could be derived (in a kind of
semantic of norms) from a sentence stating that N is valid or right; or in other
words, the norm or commandment ‘Thou shall not steal’ would be considered as
equivalent to the assertion ‘The norm “Thou shall not steal” is valid or right’.
(And again, if we use the term ‘fact’ in such a wide sense that we speak about
the fact that a norm is valid or right, then we could even derive norms from
facts. This, however, does not impair the correctness of our considerations in the
text which are concerned solely with the impossibility of deriving norms from
psychological or sociological or similar, i.e. non-semantic, facts.)
* (3) In my first discussion of these problems, I spoke of norms or decisions
but never of proposals. The proposal lo speak, instead, of ‘proposals’ is due to
L. J. Russell; see his paper ‘Propositions and Proposals’, in the Library of the
Tenth International Congress of Philosophy (Amsterdam, August 11-18, 1948),
vol. I, Proceedings of the Congress. In this important paper, statements of fact
or ‘propositions’ are distinguished from suggestions for the adoption of a line of
conduct (of a certain policy, or of certain norms, or of certain aims or ends), and
the latter are called ‘proposals’. The great advantage of this terminology is that,
as everybody knows, one can discuss a proposal, while it is not so clear whether,
and in which sense, one can discuss a decision or a norm; thus by talking of
‘norms’ or ‘decisions’, one is liable to support those who say that these things
are beyond discussion (either above it, as some dogmatic theologians or
metaphysicians may say, or—as nonsensical—below it, as some positivists may
say). Adopting Russell’s terminology, we could say that a proposition may be
asserted or stated (or a hypothesis accepted) while a proposal is adopted; and
we shall distinguish the fact of its adoption from the proposal which has been
adopted.
Our dualistic thesis then becomes the thesis that proposals are not reducible
to facts (or to statements of facts, or to propositions) even though they pertain to
facts.*
6
Cp. also the last note (71) to chapter 10.
Although my own position is, I believe, clearly enough implied in the text, I
may perhaps briefly formulate what seems to me the most important principles
of humanitarian and equalitarian ethics.

(1) Tolerance towards all who are not intolerant and who do not propagate
intolerance. (For this exception, cp. what is said in notes 4 and 6 to chapter 7.)
This implies, especially, that the moral decisions of others should be treated with
respect, as long as such decisions do not conflict with the principle of tolerance.
(2) The recognition that all moral urgency has its basis in the urgency of
suffering or pain. I suggest, for this reason, to replace the utilitarian formula
‘Aim at the greatest amount of happiness for the greatest number’, or briefly,
‘Maximize happiness’ by the formula ‘The least amount of avoidable suffering
for all’, or briefly, ‘Minimize suffering’. Such a simple formula can, I believe,
be made one of the fundamental principles (admittedly not the only one) of
public policy. (The principle ‘Maximize happiness’, in contrast, seems to be apt
to produce a benevolent dictatorship.) We should realize that from the moral
point of view suffering and happiness must not be treated as symmetrical; that is
to say, the promotion of happiness is in any case much less urgent than the
rendering of help to those who suffer, and the attempt to prevent suffering. (The
latter task has little to do with ‘matters of taste’, the former much.) Cp. also note
2 to chapter 9.
(3) The fight against tyranny; or in other words, the attempt to safeguard the
other principles by the institutional means of a legislation rather than by the
benevolence of persons in power. (Cp. section II of chapter 7.)
7
Cp. Burnet, Greek Philosophy, I, 117.—Protagoras’ doctrine referred to in
this paragraph is to be found in Plato’s dialogue Protagoras, 322a, ff.; cp. also
the Theaetetus, esp. 172b (see also note 27 to this chapter).
The difference between Platonism and Protagoreanism can perhaps be
briefly expressed as follows:
(Platonism.) There is an inherent ‘natural’ order of justice in the world, i.e.
the original or first order in which nature was created. Thus the past is good, and
any development leading to new norms is bad.
(Protagoreanism.) Man is the moral being in this world. Nature is neither
moral nor immoral. Thus it is possible for man also to improve things.—It is not
unlikely that Protagoras was influenced by Xenophanes, one of the first to
express the attitude of the open society, and to criticize Hesiod’s historical
pessimism: ‘In the beginning, the Gods did not show to man all he was wanting;
but in the course of time, he may search for the better, and find it.’ (Cp. Diels5,
18.) It seems that Plato’s nephew and successor Speusippus returned to this
progressive view (cp. Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 1072b30 and note 11 to chapter
11) and that the Academy adopted with him a more liberal attitude in the field of
politics also.
Concerning the relation of the doctrine of Protagoras to the tenets of
religion, it may be remarked that he believed God to work through man. I do not
see how this position can contradict that of Christianity. Compare with it for
instance K. Barth’s statement (Credo, 1936, p. 188): ‘The Bible is a human
document’ (i.e. man is God’s instrument).
8
Socrates’ advocacy of the autonomy of ethics (closely related to his
insistence that problems of nature do not matter) is expressed especially in his
doctrine of the self-sufficiency or autarky of the ‘virtuous’ individual. That this
theory contrasts strongly with Plato’s views of the individual will be seen later;
cp. especially notes 25 to this chapter and 36 to the next, and text. (Cp. also note
56 to chapter 10.)

9

We cannot, for instance, construct institutions which work independently
of how they are being ‘manned’. With these problems, cp. chapter 7 (text to
notes 7-8, 22-23), and especially chapter 9.
10
For Plato’s discussion of Pindar’s naturalism, see esp. Gorgias, 484b;
488b; Laws, 690b (quoted below in this chapter; cp. note 28); 714e/715a; cp.
also 890a/b. (See also Adam’s note to Rep., 359c20.)
11
Antiphon uses the term which, in connection with Parmenides and Plato, I
have translated above by ‘delusive opinion’ (cp. note 15 to chapter 3); and he
likewise opposes it to ‘truth’. Cp. also Barker’s translation in Greek Political
Theory, I—Plato and His Predecessors (1918), 83.
12
See Antiphon, On Truth; cp. Barker, op. cit., 83-5. See also next note, (2).
13
Hippias is quoted in Plato’s Protagoras, 337c. For the next four
quotations, cp. (1) Euripides Ion, 854 ff.; and (2) his Phoenissae, 538; cp. also
Gomperz, Greek Thinkers (German ed., I, 325); and Barker, op. cit., 75; cp. also
Plato’s violent attack upon Euripides in Republic, 568a-d. Furthermore (3)
Alcidamas in Schol. to Aristotle’s Rhet., I, 13, 1373b18. (4) Lycophron in
Aristotle’s Fragm., 91 (Rose); (cp. also the Pseudo-Plutarch, De Nobil., 18.2).
For the Athenian movement against slavery, cp. text to note 18 to chapter 4, and
note 29 (with further references) to the same chapter; also note 18 to chapter 10
and Addendum III (Reply to a Critic) below, especially pp. 330 f.
(1) is It worth noting that most Platonists show little sympathy with this
equalitarian movement. Barker, for instance, discusses it under the heading
‘General Iconoclasm’; cp. op. cit., 75. (See also the second quotation from
Field’s Plato quoted in text to note 3, chapter 6.) This lack of sympathy is due,
undoubtedly, to Plato’s influence.
(2) For Plato’s and Aristotle’s anti-equalitarianism mentioned in the text,
next paragraph, cp. also especially note 49 (and text) to chapter 8, and notes 3-4
(and text) to chapter 11.
This anti-equalitarianism and its devastating effects has been clearly
described by W. W, Tarn in his excellent paper ‘Alexander the Great and the
Unity of Mankind’ (Proc. of the British Acad., XIX, 1933, pp. 123 ff.). Tarn
recognizes that in the fifth century, there may have been a movement towards
‘something better than the hard-and-fast division of Greeks and barbarians; but’,
he says, ‘this had no importance for history, because anything of the sort was
strangled by the idealist philosophies. Plato and Aristotle left no doubt about
their views. Plato said that all barbarians were enemies by nature; it was proper
to wage war upon them, even to the point of enslaving .. them. Aristotle said that
all barbarians were slaves by nature ..’ (p. 124, italics mine). I fully agree with
Tarn’s appraisal of the pernicious anti-humanitarian influence of the idealist
philosophers, i.e. of Plato and Aristotle. I also agree with Tarn’s emphasis upon
the immense significance of equalitarianism, of the idea of the unity of mankind
(cp. op. cit., p. 147). The main point in which I cannot fully agree is Tarn’s
estimate of the fifth-century equalitarian movement, and of the early cynics. He
may or may not be right in holding that the historical influence of these
movements was small in comparison with that of Alexander. But I believe that
he would have rated these movements more highly if he had only followed up
the parallelism between the cosmopolitan and the anti-slavery movement. The
parallelism between the relations Greeks: barbarians and free men: slaves is
clearly enough shown by Tarn in the passage here quoted; and if we consider the
unquestionable strength of the movement against slavery (see esp. note 18 to

chapter 4) then the scattered remarks against the distinction between Greeks and
barbarians gain much in significance. Cp. also Aristotle, Politics, III, 5, 7
(1278a); IV (VI), 4, 16 (1319b); and 111, 2, 2 (1275b). See also note 48 to
chapter 8. and the reference to E. Badian at the end of that note.
14
For the theme ‘return to the beasts’, cp. chapter 10, note 71, and text.
15
For Socrates’ doctrine of the soul, see text to note 44 to chapter 10.
16
The term ‘natural right’ in an equalitarian sense came to Rome through
the Stoics (there is the influence of Antisthenes to be considered; cp. note 48 to
chapter 8) and was popularized by Roman Law (cp. Institutiones, II, I, 2; I, 2, 2).
It is used by Thomas Aquinas also (Summa, II, 91, 2). The confusing use of the
term ‘natural law’ instead of ‘natural right’ by modern Thomists is to be
regretted, as well as the small emphasis they put upon equalitarianism.
17
The monistic tendency which first led to the attempt to interpret norms as
natural has recently led to the opposite attempt, namely, to interpret natural laws
as conventional. This (physical) type of conventionalism has been based, by
Poincaré, on the recognition of the conventional or verbal character of
definitions. Poincaré, and more recently Eddington, point out that we define
natural entities by the laws they obey. From this the conclusion is drawn that
these laws, i.e. the laws of nature, are definitions, i.e. verbal conventions. Cp.
Eddington’s letter in Nature, 148 (1941), 141: ‘The elements’ (of physical
theory) ‘.. can only be defined .. by the laws they obey; so that we find ourselves
chasing our own tails in a purely formal system.’—An analysis and a criticism
of this form of conventionalism can be found in my The Logic of Scientific
Discovery, especially pp. 78 ff.
18
(1) The hope of getting some argument or theory to share our
responsibilities is, I believe, one of the basic motives of ‘scientific’ ethics.
‘Scientific’ ethics is in its absolute barrenness one of the most amazing of social
phenomena. What does it aim at? At telling us what we ought to do, i.e. at
constructing a code of norms upon a scientific basis, so that we need only look
up the index of the code if we are faced with a difficult moral decision? This
clearly would be absurd; quite apart from the fact that if it could be achieved, it
would destroy all personal responsibility and therefore all ethics. Or would it
give scientific criteria of the truth and falsity of moral judgements, i.e. of
judgements involving such terms as ‘good’ or ‘bad’? But it is clear that moral
judgements are absolutely irrelevant. Only a scandalmonger is interested in
judging people or their actions; ‘judge not’ appears to some of us one of the
fundamental and much too little appreciated laws of humanitarian ethics. (We
may have to disarm and to imprison a criminal in order to prevent him from
repeating his crimes, but too much of moral judgement and especially of moral
indignation is always a sign of hypocrisy and pharisaism.) Thus an ethics of
moral judgements would be not only irrelevant but indeed an immoral affair.
The all-importance of moral problems rests, of course, on the fact that we can
act with intelligent foresight, and that we can ask ourselves what our aims ought
to be, i.e. how we ought to act.
Nearly all moral philosophers who have dealt with the problem of how we
ought to act (with the possible exception of Kant) have tried to answer it either
by reference to ‘human nature’ (as did even Kant, when he referred to human
reason) or to the nature of ‘the good’. The first of these ways leads nowhere,
since all actions possible to us are founded upon ‘human nature’, so that the
problem of ethics could also be put by asking which elements in human nature I

ought to approve and to develop, and which sides I ought to suppress or to
control. But the second of these ways also leads nowhere; for given an analysis
of ‘the good’ in form of a sentence like: ‘The good is such and such’ for ‘such
and such is good’), we would always have to ask: What about it? Why should
this concern me? Only if the word ‘good’ is used in an ethical sense, i.e. only if
it is used to mean ‘that which I ought to do’, could I derive from the information
‘x is good’ the conclusion that I ought to do x. In other words, if the word ‘good’
is to have any ethical significance at all, it must be defined as ‘that which I (or
we) ought to do (or to promote)’. But if it is so defined, then its whole meaning
is exhausted by the defining phrase, and it can in every context be replaced by
this phrase, i.e. the introduction of the term ‘good’ cannot materially contribute
to our problem. (Cp. also note 49 (3) to chapter 11.)
All the discussions about the definition of the good, or about the possibility
of defining it, are therefore quite useless. They only show how far ‘scientific’
ethics is removed from the urgent problems of moral life. And they thus indicate
that ‘scientific’ ethics is a form of escape, and escape from the realities of moral
life, i.e. from our moral responsibilities. (In view of these considerations it is not
surprising to find that the beginning of ‘scientific’ ethics, in the form of ethical
naturalism, coincides in time with what may be called the discovery of personal
responsibility. Cp. what is said in chapter 10, text to notes 27-38 and 55-7, on
the open society and the Great Generation.) (2) It may be fitting in this
connection to refer to a particular form of the escape from responsibility
discussed here, as exhibited especially by the juridical positivism of the
Hegelian school, as well as by a closely allied spiritual naturalism. That the
problem is still significant may be seen from the fact that an author of the
excellence of Catlin remains on this important point (as on a number of others)
dependent upon Hegel; and my analysis will take the form of a criticism of
Catlin’s arguments in favour of spiritual naturalism, and against the distinction
between laws of nature and normative laws (cp. G. E. G. Catlin, A Study of the
Principles of Politics, 1930, pp. 96-99). Catlin begins by making a clear
distinction between the laws of nature and ‘laws .. which human legislators
make’; and he admits that, at first sight the phrase ‘natural law’, if applied to
norms, ‘appears to be patently unscientific, since it seems to fail to make a
distinction between that human law which requires enforcement and the physical
laws which are incapable of breach’. But he tries to show that it only appears to
be so, and that ‘our criticism’ of this way of using the term ‘natural law’ was
‘too hasty’. And he proceeds to a clear statement of spiritual naturalism, i.e. to a
distinction between ‘sound law’ which is ‘according to nature’, and other law:
‘Sound law, then, involves a formulation of human tendencies, or, in brief, is a
copy of the “natural” law to be “found” by political science. Sound law is in this
sense emphatically found and not made. It is a copy of natural social law’ (i.e. of
what I called ‘sociological laws’; cp. text to note 8 to this chapter). And he
concludes by insisting that in so far as the legal system becomes more rational,
its rules ‘cease to assume the character of arbitrary commands and become mere
deductions drawn from the primary social laws’ (i.e. from what I should call
‘sociological laws’).
(3) This is a very strong statement of spiritual naturalism. Its criticism is the
more important as Catlin combines his doctrine with a theory of social
engineering ‘which may perhaps at first sight appear similar to the one
advocated here (cp. text to note 9 to chapter 3 and text to notes 1-3 and 8-11 to

chapter 9). Before discussing it, I wish to explain why I consider Catlin’s view
to be dependent on Hegel’s positivism. Such an explanation is necessary,
because Catlin uses his naturalism in order to distinguish between ‘sound’ and
other law; in other words, he uses it in order to distinguish between ‘just’ and
‘unjust’ law; and this distinction certainly does not look like positivism, i.e. the
recognition of the existing law as the sole standard of justice. In spite of all that,
I believe that Catlin’s views are very close to positivism: my reason being that
he believes that only ‘sound’ law can be effective, and in so far ‘existent’ in
precisely Hegel’s sense. For Catlin says that when our legal code is not ‘sound’,
i.e. not in accordance with the laws of human nature, then ‘our statute remains
paper’. This statement is purest positivism; for it allows us to deduce from the
fact that a certain code is not only ‘paper’ but successfully enforced, that it is
‘sound’; or in other words, that all legislation which does not turn out to be
merely paper is a copy of human nature and therefore just.
(4) I now proceed to a brief criticism of the argument proffered by Catlin
against the distinction between (a) laws of nature which cannot be broken, and
(b) normative laws, which are man-made, i.e. enforced by sanctions; a
distinction which he himself makes so very clearly at first. Catlin’s argument is
a twofold one. He shows (a1) that laws of nature also are man-made, in a certain
sense, and that they can, in a sense, be broken; and (b1) that in a certain sense
normative laws cannot be broken. I begin with (a1) ‘The natural laws of the
physicist’, writes Catlin, ‘are not brute facts, they are rationalizations of the
physical world, whether superimposed by man or justified because the world is
inherently rational and orderly.’ And he proceeds to show that natural laws ‘can
be nullified’ when ‘fresh facts’ compel us to recast the law. My reply to this
argument is this. A statement intended as a formulation of a law of nature is
certainly man-made. We make the hypothesis that there is a certain invariable
regularity, i.e. we describe the supposed regularity with the help of a statement,
the natural law. But, as scientists, we are prepared to learn from nature that we
have been wrong; we are prepared to recast the law if fresh facts which
contradict our hypothesis show that our supposed law was no law, since it has
been broken. In other words, by accepting nature’s nullification, the scientist
shows that he accepts a hypothesis only as long as it has not been falsified;
which is the same as to say that he regards a law of nature as a rule which cannot
be broken, since he accepts the breaking of his rule as proof that his rule did not
formulate a law of nature. Furthermore: although the hypothesis is man-made,
we may be unable to prevent its falsification. This shows that, by creating the
hypothesis, we have not created the regularity which it is intended to describe
(although we did create a new set of problems, and may have suggested new
observations and interpretations), (b1) ‘It is not true’, says Catlin, ‘that the
criminal “breaks” the law when he does the forbidden act .. the statute does not
say: “Thou canst not”; it says, “Thou shall not, or this punishment will be
inflicted.” As command’, Catlin continues, ‘it may be broken, but as law, in a
very real sense, it is only broken when the punishment is not inflicted ... So far
as the law is perfected and its sanctions executed,.. it approximates to physical
law.’ The reply to this is simple. In whichever sense we speak of ‘breaking’ the
law, the juridical law can be broken; no verbal adjustment can alter that. Let us
accept Catlin’s view that a criminal cannot ‘break’ the law, and that it is only
‘broken’ if the criminal does not receive the punishment prescribed by the law.
But even from this point of view, the law can be broken; for instance, by

officers of the state who refuse to punish the criminal. And even in a state where
all sanctions are, in fact, executed, the officers could, if they chose, prevent such
execution, and so ‘break’ the law in Catlin’s sense. (That they would thereby
‘break’ the law in the ordinary sense, also, i.e. that they would become
criminals, and that they might ultimately perhaps be punished is quite another
question.) In other words: A normative law is always enforced by men and by
their sanctions, and it is therefore fundamentally different from a hypothesis.
Legally, we can enforce the suppression of murder, or of acts of kindness; of
falsity, or of truth; of justice, or of injustice. But we cannot force the sun to alter
its course. No amount of argument can bridge this gap.
19
The ‘nature of happiness and misery’ is referred to in the Theaetetus,
175c. For the close relationship between ‘nature’ and ‘Form’ or ‘Idea’, cp.
especially Republic, 597a-d, where Plato first discusses the Form or Idea of a
bed, and then refers to it as ‘the bed which exists by nature, and which was made
by God’ (597b). In the same place, he proffers the corresponding distinction
between the ‘artificial’ (or the ‘fabricated’ thing, which is an ‘imitation’) and
‘truth’. Cp. also Adam’s note to Republic, 597b10 (with the quotation from
Burnet given there), and the notes to 476b13, 501b9, 525c15; furthermore
Theaetetus, 174b (and Cornford’s note 1 to p. 85 in his Plato’s Theory of
Knowledge). See also Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 1015a14.
20
For Plato’s attack upon art, see the last book of the Republic, and
especially the passages Republic, 600a-605b, mentioned in note 39 to chapter 4.
21
Cp. notes 11, 12 and 13 to this chapter, and text. My contention that Plato
agrees at least partly with Antiphon’s naturalist theories (although he does not,
of course, agree with Antiphon’s equalitarianism) will appear strange to many,
especially to the readers of Barker, op. cit. And it may surprise them even more
to hear the opinion that the main disagreement was not so much a theoretical
one, but rather one of moral practice, and that Antiphon and not Plato was
morally in the right, as far as the practical issue of equalitarianism is concerned.
(For Plato’s agreement with Antiphon’s principle that nature is true and right,
see also text to notes 23 and 28, and note 30 to this chapter.)
22
These quotations are from Sophist, 266b and 265c. But the passage also
contains (265c a criticism (similar to Laws, quoted in text to notes 23 and 30 in
this chapter) of what may be described as a materialist interpretation of
naturalism such as was held, perhaps, by Antiphon; I mean ‘the belief .. that
nature .. generates without intelligence’.
23
Cp. Laws, 892a and c. For the doctrine of the affinity of the soul to the
Ideas, see also note 15 (8) to chapter 3. For the affinity of ‘natures’ and ‘souls’,
see Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 1015a14, with the passages of the Laws quoted, and
with 896d/e: ‘the soul dwells in all things that move ..’
Compare further especially the following passages in which ‘natures’ and
‘souls’ are used in a way that is obviously synonymous: Republic, 4.85a/b,
485e/486a and d, 486b (‘nature’); 486b and d (‘soul’), 490e/491a (both), 491b
(both), and many other places (cp. also Adam’s note to 370a7). The affinity is
directly stated in 490b(10). For the affinity between ‘nature’ and ‘soul’ and
‘race’, cp. 501e where the phrase ‘philosophic natures’ or ‘souls’ found in
analogous passages is replaced by ‘race of philosophers’.
There is also an affinity between ‘soul’ or ‘nature’ and the social class or
caste; see for instance Republic, 435b. The connection between caste and race is
fundamental, for from the beginning (415a), caste is identified with race.

‘Nature’ is used in the sense of ‘talent’ or ‘condition of the soul’ in Laws,
648d, 650b, 655e, 710b, 766a, 875c. The priority and superiority of nature over
art is stated in Laws, 889a, ff. For ‘natural’ in the sense of ‘right’, or ‘true’, see
Laws, 686d and 818e, respectively.
24
Cp. the passages quoted in note 32 (1), (a) and (c), to chapter 4.
26
The Socratic doctrine of autarky is mentioned in Republic, 387d/e (cp.
Apology, 41c, ff., and Adam’s note to Rep., 387d25). This is only one of the few
scattered passages reminiscent of Socratic teaching; but it is in direct
contradiction to the main doctrine of the Republic, as it is expounded in the text
(see also note 36 to chapter 6, and text); this may be seen by contrasting the
quoted passage with 369c, ff., and very many similar passages.
26
Cp. for instance the passage quoted in the text to note 29 to chapter 4. For
the ‘rare and uncommon natures’, cp. Republic, 491a/b, and many other
passages, for instance Timaeus, 51e: ‘reason is shared by the gods with very few
men’. For the ‘social habitat’, see 491d (cp. also chapter 23).
While Plato (and Aristotle; cp. especially note 4 to chapter 11, and text)
insisted that manual work is degrading, Socrates seems to have adopted a very
different attitude. (Cp. Xenophon, Memorabilia, II, 7; 7-10; Xenophon’s story
is, to some extent, corroborated by Antisthenes’ and Diogenes’ attitude towards
manual work; cp. also note 56 to chapter 10.)
27
See especially Theaetetus, 172b (cp. also Cornford’s comments on this
passage in Plato’s Theory of Knowledge). Sec also note 7 to this chapter. The
elements of conventionalism in Plato’s teaching may perhaps explain why the
Republic was said, by some who still possessed Protagoras’ writings, to
resemble these. (Cp. Diogenes Laertius, III, 37.) For Lycophron’s contract
theory, see notes 43-54 to chapter 6 (especially note 46), and text.
28
Cp. Laics, 690b/c; see note 10 to this chapter. Plato mentions Pindar’s
naturalism also in Gorgias, 484b, 488b; Laws, 714c, 890a. For the opposition
between ‘external compulsion’ on the one hand, and (a) ‘free action’, (b)
‘nature’, on the other, cp. also Republic, 603c. and Timaeus, 64d. (Cp. also Rep.,
466c-d, quoted in note 30 to this chapter.)
29
Cp. Republic, 369b-c. This is part of the contract theory. The next
quotation, which is the first statement of the naturalist principle in the perfect
state, is 370a/b-c. (Naturalism is in the Republic first mentioned by Glaucon in
358e, ff.; but this is, of course, not Plato’s own doctrine of naturalism.)
(1) For the further development of the naturalistic principle of the division
of labour and the part played by this principle in Plato’s theory of justice, cp.
especially text to notes 6, 23 and 40 to chapter 6.
(2) For a modern radical version of the naturalistic ‘principle, see Marx’s
formula of the communist society (adopted from Louis Blanc): ‘From each
according to his ability: to each according to his needs!’ (Cp. for instance A
Handbook of Marxism, E. Burns, 1935, p. 752; and note 8 to chapter 13; see also
note 3 to chapter 13, and note 48 to chapter 24, and text.)
For the historical roots of this ‘principle of communism’, see Plato’s maxim
‘Friends have in common all things they possess’ (see note 36 to chapter 6, and
text; for Plato’s communism see also notes 34 to chapter 6 and 30 to chapter 4,
and text), and compare these passages with the Acts: ‘And all that believed were
together, and had all things in common;.. and parted them to all men, as every
man had need.’ (2, 44-45).—‘Neither was there any among them that lacked: for
.. distribution was made unto every man according as he had need’. (4, 34-35).

30

See note 23, and text. The quotations in the present paragraph are all from
the Laws: (1) 889, a-d (cp. the very similar passage in the Theaetetus, 172b); (2)
896c-e; (3) 890e/891 a.
For the next paragraph in the text (i.e. for my contention that Plato’s
naturalism is incapable of solving practical problems) the following may serve
as an illustration. Many naturalists have contended that men and women are ‘by
nature’ different, both physically and spiritually, and that they should therefore
fulfil different functions in social life. Plato, however, uses the same naturalistic
argument to prove the opposite; for, he argues, are not dogs of both sexes useful
for watching as well as hunting? ‘Do you agree’, he writes (Rep., 466c-d), ‘that
women .. must participate with men in guarding as well as in hunting, as it is
with dogs;.. and that in so doing, they will be acting in the most desirable
manner, since this will be not contrary to nature, but in accordance with the
natural relations of the sexes?’ (See also text to note 28 to this chapter; for the
dog as ideal guardian, cp. chapter 4, especially note 32 (2), and text.)
31
For a brief criticism of the biological theory of the state, see note 7 to
chapter 10, and text. * For the oriental origin of the theory, see R. Eisler, Revue
de Synthese Historique, vol. 41, p. 15.*
32
For some applications of Plato’s political theory of the soul, and for the
inferences drawn from it, see notes 58-9 to chapter 10, and text. For the
fundamental methodological analogy between city and individual, see especially
Republic, 368e, 445c, 577c. For Alcmaeon’s political theory of the human
individual, or of human physiology, cp. note 13 to chapter 6.
33
Cp. Republic, 423, b and d.
34
This quotation as well as the next is from G. Grote, Plato and the Other
Companions of Socrates (1875), vol. III, 124.—The main passages of the
Republic are 439c, f. (the story of Leontius); 571c, f. (the bestial part versus the
reasoning part); 588c (the Apocalyptic Monster; cp. the ‘Beast’ which possesses
a Platonic Number, in the Revelation 13, 17 and 18); 603d and 604b (man at war
with himself). See also Laws, 689a-b, and notes 58-9 to chapter 10.
35
Cp. Republic, 519e, f. (cp. also note 10 to chapter 8); the next two
quotations are both from the Laws, 903c. (I have reversed their order.) It may be
mentioned that the ‘whole’ referred to in these two passages (‘pan’ and ‘holon’)
is not the state but the world; yet there is no doubt that the underlying tendency
of this cosmological holism is a political holism; cp. Laws, 903d-e (where the
physician and craftsman is associated with the statesman),’and the fact that Plato
often uses ‘holon’ (especially the plural of it) to mean ‘state’ as well as ‘world’.
Furthermore, the first of these two passages (in my order of quoting) is a shorter
version of Republic, 420b-421c; the second of Republic, 520b, ff. (‘We have
created you for the sake of the state, as well as for your own sake.’) Further
passages on holism or collectivism are: Republic, 424a, 449e, 462a, f., Laws,
715b, 739c, 875a, f, 903b, 923b, 942a, f. (See also notes 31/32 to chapter 6.) For
the remark in this paragraph that Plato spoke of the state as an organism, cp.
Republic, 462c, and Laws, 964e, where the state is even compared with the
human body.
36
Cp. Adam in his edition of the Republic, vol. II, 303; see also note 3 to
chapter 4, and text.
37
This point is emphasized by Adam, op. cit., note 546a, b7, and pp. 288
and 307. The next quotation in this paragraph is Republic, 546a; cp. Republic,
485a/b, quoted in note 26 (1) to chapter 3 and in text to note 33 to chapter 8.

38

This is the main point in which I must deviate from Adam’s
interpretation. I believe Plato to indicate that the philosopher king of Books VIVII, whose main interest is in the things that are not generated and do not decay
(Rep., 485b; see the last note and the passages there referred to), obtains with his
mathematical and dialectical training the knowledge of the Platonic Number and
with it the means of arresting social degeneration and thereby the decay of the
state. See especially the text to note 39.
The quotations that follow in this paragraph are: ‘keeping pure the race of
the guardians’; cp. Republic, 460c, and text to note 34 to chapter 4. ‘A city thus
constituted, etc.’: 546a.
The reference to Plato’s distinction, in the field of mathematics, acoustics,
and astronomy, between rational knowledge and delusive opinion based upon
experience or perception is to Republic, 523a, ff., 525d, ff. (where ‘calculation’
is discussed; see especially 526a); 527d, ff., 529b, f, 531a, ff. (down to 534a and
537d); see also 509d-511e.
39
* I have been blamed for ‘adding’ the words (which I never placed in
quotation marks) ‘lacking a purely rational method’; but in view of Rep., 523a to
537d, it seems to me clear that Plato’s reference to ‘perception’ implies just this
contrast.* The quotations in this paragraph are from Rep., 546b, ff. Note that,
throughout this passage, it is ‘The Muses’ who speak through the mouth of
‘Socrates’.
In my interpretation of the Story of the Fall and the Number, I have
carefully avoided the difficult, undecided, and perhaps undecidable problem of
the computation of the Number itself. (It may be undecidable since Plato may
not have revealed his secret in full.) I confine my interpretation entirely to the
passages immediately before and after the one that describes the Number itself;
these passages are, I believe, clear enough. In spite of that, my interpretation
deviates, as far as I know, from previous attempts.
(1) The crucial statement on which I base my interpretation is (A) that the
guardians work by ‘calculation aided by perception’. Next to this, I am using
the statements (B) that they will not ‘accidentally hit upon (the correct way of)
obtaining good offspring’; (C) that they will ‘blunder, and beget children in the
wrong way’; (D) that they are ‘ignorant’ of such matters (that is, such matters as
the Number).
Regarding (A), it should be clear to every careful reader of Plato that such a
reference to perception is intended to express a criticism of the method in
question. This view of the passage under consideration (546a, f.) is supported by
the fact that it comes so soon after the passages 523a-537d (see the end of the
last note), in which the opposition between pure rational knowledge and opinion
based on perception is one of the main themes, and in which, more especially,
the term ‘calculation’ is used in a context emphasizing the opposition between
rational knowledge and experience, while the term ‘perception’ (see also
511c/d) is given a definite technical and deprecatory sense. (Cp. also, for
instance, Plutarch’s wording in his discussion of this opposition: in his Life of
Marcellus, 306.) I am therefore of the opinion, and this opinion is enforced by
the context, especially by (B), (C), (D), that Plato’s remark (A) implies (a) that
‘calculation based upon perception’ is a poor method, and (b) that there are
better methods, namely the methods of mathematics and dialectics, which yield
pure rational knowledge. The point I am trying to elaborate is, indeed, so plain,
that I should not have troubled so much about it were it not for the fact that even

Adam has missed it. In his note to 546a, b7, he interprets ‘calculation’ as a
reference to the rulers’ task of determining the number of marriages they should
permit, and ‘perception’ as the means by which they ‘decide what couples
should be joined, what children be reared, etc.’ That is to say, Adam takes
Plato’s remark to be a simple description and not as a polemic against the
weakness of the empirical method. Accordingly, he relates neither the statement
(C) that the rulers will ‘blunder’ nor the remark (D) that they are ‘ignorant’ to
the fact that they use empirical methods. (The remark (B) that they will not ‘hit’
upon the right method ‘by accident’ would simply be left untranslated, if we
follow Adam’s suggestion.)
In interpreting our passage we must keep it in mind that in Book VIII,
immediately before the passage in question, Plato returns to the question of the
first city of Books II to IV. (See Adam’s notes to 449a, ff., and 543a, ff.) But the
guardians of this city are neither mathematicians nor dialecticians. Thus they
have no idea of the purely rational methods emphasized so much in Book VII,
525-534. In this connection, the import of the remarks on perception, i.e. on the
poverty of empirical methods, and on the resulting ignorance of the guardians, is
unmistakable.
The statement (B) that the rulers will not ‘hit accidentally upon’ (the correct
way of) ‘obtaining good offspring, or none at all’, is perfectly clear in my
interpretation. Since the rulers have merely empirical methods at their disposal,
it would be only a lucky accident if they did hit upon a method whose
determination needs mathematical or other rational methods. Adam suggests
(note to 546a, b7) the translation: ‘none the more will they by calculation
together with perception obtain good offspring’; and only in brackets, he adds:
‘lit. hit the obtaining of. I think that his failure to make any sense of the ‘hit’ is a
consequence of his failure to see the implications of (A). The interpretation here
suggested makes (C) and (D) perfectly understandable; and Plato’s remark that
his Number is ‘master over better or worse birth’, fits in perfectly. It may be
remarked that Adam does not comment on (D), i.e. the ignorance, although such
a comment would be most necessary in view of his theory (note to 546d22) that
‘the number is not a nuptial .. number’, and that it has no technical eugenic
meaning.
That the meaning of the Number is indeed technical and eugenic is, I think,
clear, if we consider that the passage containing the Number is enclosed in
passages containing references to eugenic knowledge, or rather, lack of eugenic
knowledge. Immediately before the Number, (A), (B), (C), occur, and
immediately afterwards, (D), as well as the story of the bride and bridegroom
and their degenerate offspring. Besides, (C) before the Number and (D) after the
Number refer to each other; for (C), the ‘blunder’, is connected with a reference
to ‘begetting in the wrong way’, and (D), the ‘ignorance’, is connected with an
exactly analogous reference, viz., ‘uniting bride and bridegroom in the wrong
manner’. (See also next note.)
The last point in which I must defend my interpretation is my contention
that those who know the Number thereby obtain the power to influence ‘better or
worse births’. This does not of course follow from Plato’s statement that the
Number itself has such power; for if Adam’s interpretation is right, then the
Number regulates the births because it determines an unalterable period after
which degeneration is bound to set in. But I assert that Plato’s references to
‘perception’, to ‘blunder’ and to ‘ignorance’ as the immediate cause of the

eugenic mistakes would be pointless if he did not mean that, had they possessed
an adequate knowledge of the appropriate mathematical and purely rational
methods, the guardians would not have blundered. But this makes the inference
inevitable that the Number has a technical eugenic meaning, and that its
knowledge is the key to the power of arresting degeneration. (This inference
also seems to me the only one compatible with all we know about this type of
superstition; all astrology, for instance, involves the apparently somewhat
contradictory conception that the knowledge of our fate may help us to influence
this fate.)
I think that the rejection of the explanation of the Number as a secret
breeding taboo arises from a reluctance to credit Plato with such crude ideas,
however clearly he may express them. In other words, they arise from the
tendency to idealize Plato.
(2) In this connection, I must refer to an article by A. E. Taylor, ‘The
Decline and Fall of The State in Republic, VIII’ (Mind, N.S. 48, 1939, pp. 23
ff.). In this article, Taylor attacks Adam (in my opinion not justly), and argues
against him: ‘It is true, of course, that the decay of the ideal State is expressly
said in 546b to begin when the ruling class “beget children out of due season”..
But this need not mean, and in my opinion does not mean, that Plato is
concerning himself here with problems of the hygiene of reproduction. The main
thought is the simple one that if, like everything of man’s making, the State
carries the seeds of its own dissolution within it, this must, of course, mean that
sooner or later the persons wielding supreme power will be inferior to those who
preceded them’ (pp. 25 ff.). Now this interpretation seems to me not only
untenable, in view of Plato’s fairly definite statements, but also a typical
example of the attempt to eliminate from Plato’s writing such embarrassing
elements as racialism or superstition. Adam began by denying that the Number
has technical eugenic importance, and by asserting that it is not a ‘nuptial
number’, but merely a cosmological period. Taylor now continues by denying
that Plato is here at all interested in ‘problems of the hygiene of the
reproduction’. But Plato’s passage is thronged with allusions to these problems,
and Taylor himself admits two pages before (p. 23) that it is ‘nowhere
suggested’ that the Number ‘is a determinant of anything but the “better and
worse births”’. Besides, not only the passage in question but the whole of the
Republic (and similarly the Statesman, especially 310b, 310c) is simply full of
emphasis upon the ‘problems of the hygiene of reproduction’. Taylor’s theory
that Plato, when speaking of the ‘human creature’ (or, as Taylor puts it, of a
‘thing of human generation’), means the state, and that Plato wishes to allude to
the fact that the state is the creation of a human lawgiver, is, I think, without
support in Plato’s text. The whole passage begins with a reference to the things
of the sensible world in flux, to the things that are generated and that decay (see
notes 37 and 38 to this chapter), and more especially, to living things, plants as
well as animals, and to their racial problems. Besides, a thing ‘of man’s making’
would, if emphasized by Plato in such a context, mean an ‘artificial’ thing which
is inferior because it is ‘twice removed’ from reality. (Cp. text to notes 20-23 to
this chapter, and the whole Tenth Book of the Republic down to the end of
608b.) Plato would never expect anybody to interpret the phrase ‘a thing of
man’s making’ as meaning the perfect, the ‘natural’ state; rather he would
expect them to think of something very inferior (like poetry; cp. note 39 to

chapter 4). The phrase which Taylor translates ‘thing of human generation’ is
usually simply translated by ‘human creature’, and this removes all difficulties.
(3) Assuming that my interpretation of the passage in question is correct, a
suggestion may be made with the intention of connecting Plato’s belief in the
significance of racial degeneration with his repeated advice that the number of
the members of the ruling class should be kept constant (advice that shows that
the sociologist Plato understood the unsettling effect of population increase).
Plato’s way of thinking, described at the end of the present chapter (cp. text to
note 45; and note 37 to chapter 8), especially the way he opposes The One
monarch, The Few timocrats, to The Many who are nothing but a mob, may
have suggested to him the belief that an increase in numbers is equivalent to a
decline in quality. (Something on these lines is indeed suggested in the Laws,
710d.) If this hypothesis is correct, then he may easily have concluded that
population increase is interdependent with, or perhaps even caused by, racial
degeneration. Since population increase was in fact the main cause of the
instability and dissolution of the, early Greek tribal societies (cp. notes 6, 7, and
63 to chapter 10, and text), this hypothesis would explain why Plato believed
that the ‘real’ cause was racial degeneration (in keeping with his general theories
of ‘nature’, and of ‘change’).
40
(1) Or ‘at the wrong time’. Adam insists (note to 546d22) that we must
not translate ‘at the wrong time’ but ‘inopportunely’. 1 may remark that my
interpretation is quite independent of this question; it is fully compatible with
‘inopportunely’ or ‘wrongly’ or ‘at the wrong time’ or out of due season’. (The
phrase in question means, originally, something like ‘contrary to the proper
measure’; usually it means ‘at the wrong time’.)
* (2) Concerning Plato’s remarks about ‘mingling’ and ‘mixture’, it may be
observed that Plato seems to have held a primitive but popular theory of heredity
(apparently still held by race-horse breeders) according to which the offspring is
an even mixture or blend of the characters or ‘natures’ of his two parents, and
that their characters, or natures, or ‘virtues’ (stamina, speed, etc., or, according
to the Republic, the Statesman, and the Laws, gentleness, fierceness, boldness,
self-restraint, etc.) are mixed in him in proportion to the number of ancestors
(grandparents, great-grandparents, etc.) who Possessed these characters.
Accordingly, the art of breeding is one of a judicious and scientific—
mathematical or harmonious—blending or mixing of natures. See especially the
Statesman, where the royal craft of statesmanship or herdsmanship is likened to
that of weaving, and where the kingly weaver must blend boldness with selfrestraint. (See also Republic, 375c-e, and 410c, ff.; Laws, 731b; and notes 34 f.
to chapter 4; 13 and 39 f. to chapter 8; and text.) *
41
For Plato’s law of social revolutions, see especially note 26 to chapter 4,
and text.
42
The term ‘meta-biology’ is used by G. B. Shaw in this sense, i.e. as
denoting a kind of religion. (Cp. the preface to Back to Methuselah; see also
note 66 to chapter 12.)
43
Cp. Adam’s note to Republic, 547a 3.
44
For a criticism of what I call ‘psychologism’ in the method of sociology,
cp. text to note 19 to chapter 13 and chapter 14, where Mill’s still popular
methodological psychologism is discussed.
45
It has often been said that Plato’s thought must not be squeezed into a
‘system’; accordingly, my attempts in this paragraph (and not only in this

paragraph) to show the systematic unity of Plato’s thought, which is obviously
based on the Pythagorean table of opposites, will probably arouse criticism. But
I believe that such a systematization is a necessary test of any interpretation.
Those who believe that they do not need an interpretation, and that they can
‘know’ a philosopher or his work, and take him just ‘as he was’, or his work just
‘as it was’, are mistaken. They cannot but interpret both the man and his work;
but since they are not aware of the fact that they interpret (that their view is
coloured by tradition, temperament, etc.), their interpretation must necessarily
be naive and uncritical. (Cp. also chapter 10 (notes 1-5 and 56), and chapter 25.)
A critical interpretation, however, must take the form of a rational
reconstruction, and must be systematic; it must try to reconstruct the
philosopher’s thought as a consistent edifice. Cp. also what A. C. Ewing says of
Kant (A Short Commentary on Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, 1938, p. 4): ‘..
we ought to start with the assumption that a great philosopher is not likely to be
always contradicting himself, and consequently, wherever there are two
interpretations, one of which will make Kant consistent and the other
inconsistent, prefer the former to the latter, if reasonably possible.’ This surely
applies also to Plato, and even to interpretation in general.

Notes To Chapter 6
1

Cp. note 3 to chapter 4 and text, especially the end of that paragraph
Furthermore, note 2 (2) to that chapter. Concerning the formula Back to Nature,
I wish to draw attention to the fact that Rousseau was greatly influenced by
Plato. Indeed, a glance at the Social Contract will reveal a wealth of analogies
especially with those Platonic passages on naturalism which have been
commented upon in the last chapter. Cp. especially note 14 to chapter 9. There is
also an interesting similarity between Republic, 591a, ff. (and Gorgias, 472e, ff.,
where a similar idea occurs in an individualist context), and Rousseau’s (and
Hegel’s) famous theory of punishment. (Barker, Greek Political Theory, I, 388
ff, rightly emphasizes Plato’s influence upon Rousseau. But he does not see the
strong element of romanticism in Plato; and it is not generally appreciated that
the rural romanticism which influenced both France and Shakespeare’s England
through the medium of Sanazzaro’s Arcadia, has its origin in Plato’s Dorian
shepherds; cp. notes 11 (3), 26, and 32 to chapter 4, and note 14 to chapter 9.)
2
Cp. R. H. S. Crossman, Plato To-Day (1937), 132; the next quotation is
from p. 111. This interesting book (like the works of Grote and T. Gomperz; has
greatly encouraged me to develop my rather unorthodox views on Plato, and to
follow them up to their rather unpleasant conclusions. For the quotations from
C. E. M. Joad, cp. his Guide to the Philosophy of Morals and Politics (1938),
661, and 660. I may also refer here to the very interesting remarks on Plato’s
views on justice by C. L. Stevenson, in his article ‘Persuasive Definitions’
(Mind, N.S., vol. 47, 1938, pp. 331 ff.).
3
Cp. Crossman, op. cit., 132 f. The next two quotations are: Field, Plato,
etc., 91; cp. similar remarks in Barker, Greek Political Theory, etc. (see note 13
to chapter 5).
The idealization of Plato has played a considerable part in the debates on
the genuineness of the various works transmitted under his name. Many of them
have been rejected by some of the critics simply because they contained
passages which did not fit in with their idealized view of Plato. A rather naive as

well as typical expression of this attitude can be found in Davies’ and
Vaughan’s ‘Introductory Notice’ (cp. the Golden Treasury edition of the
Republic, p. vi): ‘Mr. Grote, in his zeal to take Plato down from his superhuman
pedestal, may be somewhat too ready to attribute to him the compositions which
have been judged unworthy of so divine a philosopher.’ It does not seem to
occur to the writers that their judgement of Plato should depend on what he
wrote, and not vice versa; and that, if these compositions are genuine and
unworthy, Plato was not quite so divine a philosopher. (For Plato’s divinity, see
also Simplicius in Arist. de coelo, 32b44, 319a15, etc.)
4
The formulation of (a) emulates one of Kant’s, who describes a just
constitution as ‘a constitution that achieves the greatest possible freedom of
human individuals by framing the laws in such a way that the freedom of each
can co-exist with that of all others’. (Critique of Pure Reason2, 373); see also his
Theory of Right, where he says: ‘Right (or justice) is the sum total of the
conditions which are necessary for everybody’s free choice to co-exist with that
of everybody else, in accordance with a general law of liberty.’ Kant believed
that this was the aim pursued by Plato in the Republic; from which we may see
that Kant was one of the many philosophers who either were deceived by Plato
or who idealized him by imputing to him their own humanitarian ideas. I may
remark, in this connection, that Kant’s ardent liberalism is very little appreciated
in English and American writings on political philosophy (in spite of Hastie’s
Kant’s Principles of Politics). He is only too often claimed to be a forerunner of
Hegel; but in view of the fact that he recognized in the romanticism of both
Herder and Fichte a doctrine diametrically opposed to his own, this claim is
grossly unjust to Kant, and there can be no doubt that he would have strongly
resented it. It is the tremendous influence of Hegelianism that led to a wide
acceptance of this, I believe, completely untenable claim.
5
Cp. text to notes 32/33 to chapter 5.
6
Cp. text to notes 25-29, chapter 5. The quotations in the present paragraph
are: (1) Republic, 433a; (2) Republic, 434a/b; (3) Republic, 441d. With Plato’s
statement, in the first quotation, ‘we have repeated over and again’, cp. also esp.
Republic, 397e, where the theory of justice is carefully prepared, and, of course,
Republic, 369b-c, quoted in text to note 29, chapter 5. See also notes 23 and 40
to the present chapter.
7
As pointed out in chapter 4 (note 18 and text, and note 29), Plato does not
say much about slaves in the Republic, although what he says is significant
enough; but he dispels all doubts about his attitude in the Laws (cp. especially G.
R. Morrow’s article in Mind, referred to in note 29 to chapter 4).
8
The quotations are from Barker, Greek Political Theory, I, p. 180. Barker
states (p. 176 f.) that ‘Platonic Justice’ is ‘social justice’, and correctly
emphasizes its holistic nature. He mentions (178 f.) the possible criticism that
this formula does ‘not .. touch the essence of what men generally mean by
justice’, i.e. ‘a principle for dealing with the clash of wills’, i.e. justice as
pertaining to individuals. But he thinks that ‘such an objection is beside the
point’, and that Plato’s idea is ‘not a matter of law’ but ‘a conception of social
morality’ (179); and he goes on to assert that this treatment of justice
corresponded, in a way, to the current Greek ideas of justice: ‘Nor was Plato, in
conceiving justice in this sense, very far removed from the current ideas in
Greece.’ He does not even mention that there exists some evidence to the
contrary, as here discussed in the next notes, and text.

8

Cp. Gorgias, 488e, ff.; the passage is more fully quoted and discussed in
section VIII below (see note 48 to this chapter, and text). For Aristotle’s theory
of slavery, see note 3 to chapter 11 and text. The quotations from Aristotle in
this paragraph are: (1) and (2) Nicom. Ethics, V, 4, 7, and 8; (3) Politics, III, 12,
1 (1282b; see also notes 20 and 30 to this chapter. The passage contains a
reference to the Nicom. Eth.); (4) Nicom. Ethics, V, 4, 9; (5) Politics, IV (VI), 2,
1 (1317b).—In the Nicom. Ethics, V, 3, 7 (cp. also Pol., III, 9, 1; 1280a),
Aristotle also mentions that the meaning of ‘justice’ varies in democratic,
oligarchic, and aristocratic states, according to their different ideas of ‘merit’.
*(What follows here was first added in the American edition of 1950.)
For Plato’s views, in the Laws, on political justice and equality, see
especially the passage on the two kinds of equality (Laws, 757b-d) quoted below
under (1). For the fact, mentioned here in the text, that not only virtue and
breeding but also wealth should count in the distribution of honours and of
spoils (and even size and good looks), see Laws, 744c, quoted in note 20 (1) to
the present chapter, where other relevant passages are also discussed.
(1) In the Laws, 757b—d, Plato discusses ‘two kinds of equality’. ‘The one
of these .. is equality of measure, weight, or number [i.e. numerical or
arithmetical equality]; but the truest and best equality .. distributes more to the
greater and less to the smaller, giving each his due measure, in accordance with
nature ... By granting the greater honour to those who are superior in virtue, and
the lesser honour to those who are inferior in virtue and breeding, it distributes
to each what is proper, according to this principle of [rational] proportions.
And this is precisely what we shall call “political justice”. And whoever may
found a state must make this the sole aim of his legislation ..: this justice alone
which, as stated, is natural equality, and which is distributed, as the situation
requires, to unequals.’ This second of the two equalities which constitutes what
Plato here calls ‘political justice’ (and what Aristotle calls ‘distributive justice’),
and which is described by Plato (and Aristotle) as ‘proportionate equality’—the
truest, best, and most natural equality—was later called ‘geometrical’ (Gorgias
508a; see also 465b/c, and Plutarch, Moralia 719b, f.), as opposed to the lower
and democratic ‘arithmetical’ equality. On this identification, the remarks under
(2) may throw some light.
(2) According to tradition (see Comm. in Arist. Graeca, pars XV, Berlin,
1897, p. 117, 29, and pars XVIII, Berlin, 1900, p. 118, 18), an inscription over
the door of Plato’s academy said: ‘Nobody untrained in geometry may enter my
house.’ I suspect that the meaning of this is not merely an emphasis upon the
importance of mathematical studies, but that it means: ‘Arithmetic (i.e. more
precisely, Pythagorean number theory) is not enough; you must know
geometry!’ And I shall attempt to sketch the reasons which make me believe
that the latter phrase adequately sums up one of Plato’s most important
contributions to science. See also Addendum, p. 319.
As is now generally believed, the earlier Pythagorean treatment of geometry
adopted a method somewhat similar to the one nowadays called
‘arithmetization’. Geometry was treated as part of the theory of integers (or
‘natural’ numbers, i.e. of numbers composed of monads or ‘indivisible units’;
cp. Republic, 525e) and of their ‘logoi’, i.e. their ‘rational’ proportions. For
example, the Pythagorean rectangular triangles were those with sides in such
rational proportions. (Examples are 3:4 15; or 5: 12: 13.) A general formula
ascribed to Pythagoras is this: 2n + 1: 2n(n + 1): 2n(n + 1) + 1. But this formula,

derived from the ‘gnomon’, is not general enough, as the example 8: 15: 17
shows. A general formula, from which the Pythagorean can be obtained by
putting m = n + 1, is this: m2—n2: 2mn: m2 + n2 (where m > n). Since this
formula is a close consequence of the so-called ‘Theorem of Pythagoras’ (if
taken together with that kind of Algebra which seems to have been known to the
early Pythagoreans), and since this formula was, apparently, not only unknown
to Pythagoras but even to Plato (who proposed, according to Proclus, another
non-general formula), it seems that the ‘Theorem of Pythagoras’ was not known,
in its general form, to either Pythagoras or even to Plato. (See for a less radical
view on this matter T. Heath, A History of Greek Mathematics, 1921, vol. I, pp.
80-2. The formula described by me as ‘general’ is essentially that of Euclid; it
can be obtained from Heath’s unnecessarily complicated formula on p. 82 by
first obtaining the three sides of the triangle and by multiplying them by 2/mn,
and then by substituting in the result m and n and p and q.)
The discovery of the irrationality of the square root of two (alluded to by
Plato in the Greater Hippias and in the Meno; cp. note 10 to chapter 8; see also
Aristotle, Anal. Priora, 413a6 f.) destroyed the Pythagorean programme of
‘arithmetizing’ geometry, and with it, it appears, the vitality of the Pythagorean
Order itself. The tradition that this discovery was at first kept secret is, it seems,
supported by the fact that Plato still calls the irrational at first ‘arrhētos’, i.e. the
secret, the unmentionable mystery; cp. the Greater Hippias, 303b/c; Republic,
546c. (A later term is ‘the non-commensurable’; cp. Theaetetus, 147c, and Laws,
820c. The term ‘alogos’ seems to occur first in Democritus, who wrote two
books On Illogical Lines and Atoms (or and Full Bodies) which are lost; Plato
knew the term, as proved by his somewhat disrespectful allusion to Democritus’
title in the Republic, 534d, but never used it himself as a synonym for
‘arrhetos’. The first extant and indubitable use in this sense is in Aristotle’s
Anal. Post., 76b9. See also T. Heath, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 84 f., 156 f. and my first
Addendum on p. 319, below.)
It appears that the breakdown of the Pythagorean programme, i.e. of the
arithmetical method of geometry, led to the development of the axiomatic
method of Euclid, that is to say, of a new method which was on the one side
designed to rescue, from the breakdown, what could be rescued (including the
method of rational proof), and on the other side to accept the irreducibility of
geometry to arithmetic. Assuming all this, it would seem highly probable that
Plato’s role in the transition from the older Pythagorean method to that of Euclid
was an exceedingly important one—in fact, that Plato was one of the first to
develop a specifically geometrical method aiming at rescuing what could be
rescued from, and at cutting the losses of, the breakdown of Pythagoreanism.
Much of this must be considered as a highly uncertain historical hypothesis, but
some confirmation may be found in Aristotle, Anal. Post., 76b9 (mentioned
above), especially if this passage is compared with the Laws, 818c, 895e (even
and odd), and 819e/820a, 820c (incommensurable). The passage reads:
‘Arithmetic assumes the meaning of “odd” and “even”, geometry that of
‘irrational”..’ (Or ‘incommensurable’; cp. Anal. Priora, 41a26 f., 503a7. See
also Metaphysics, 983a20, 1061b1-3, where the problem of irrationality is
treated as if it were the proprium of geometry, and 1089a, where, as in Anal.
Post., 76b40, there is an allusion to the ‘square foot’ method of the Theaetetus,
147d.) Plato’s great interest in the problem of irrationality is shown especially in
two of the passages mentioned above, the Theaetetus, 147c-148a, and Laws,

819d-822d, where Plato declares that he is ashamed of the Greeks for not being
alive to the great problem of incommensurable Magnitudes.
Now I suggest that the ‘Theory of the Primary Bodies’ (in the Timaeus, 53c
to 62c, and perhaps even down to 64a; see also Republic, 528b-d) was part of
Plato’s answer to the challenge. It preserves, on the one hand, the atomistic
character of Pythagoreanism—the indivisible units (‘monads’) which also play a
role in the school of the Atomists—and it introduces, on the other hand, the
irrationalities (of the square roots of two and three) whose admission into the
world had become unavoidable. It does so by taking two of the offending
rectangular triangles—the one which is half of a square and incorporates the
square root of two, and the one which is half of an equilateral triangle and
incorporates the square root of three—as the units of which everything else is
composed. Indeed, the doctrine that these two irrational triangles are the limits
(peras; cp. Meno, 75d-76a) or Forms of all elementary physical bodies may be
said to be one of the central physical doctrines of the Timaeus.
All this would suggest that the warning against those untrained in geometry
(an allusion to it may perhaps be found in the Timaeus, 54a) might have had the
more pointed significance mentioned above, and that it may have been
connected with the belief that geometry is something of higher importance than
is arithmetic. (Cp. Timaeus, 31c.) And this, in turn, would explain why Plato’s
‘proportionate equality’, said by him to be something more aristocratic than the
democratic arithmetical or numerical equality, was later identified with the
‘geometrical equality’, mentioned by Plato in the Gorgias, 508a (cp. note 48 to
this chapter), and why (for example by Plutarch, loc. cit.) arithmetic and
geometry were associated with democracy and Spartan aristocracy
respectively—in spite of the fact, then apparently forgotten, that the
Pythagoreans had been as aristocratically minded as Plato himself; that their
programme had stressed arithmetic; and that ‘geometrical’, in their language, is
the name of a certain kind of numerical (i.e. arithmetical) proportion.
(3) In the Timaeus, Plato needs for the construction of the Primary Bodies
an Elementary Square and an Elementary Equilateral Triangle. These two, in
turn, are composed of two different kinds of sub-elementary triangles—the halfsquare which incorporates √2, and the half-equilateral which incorporates √3
respectively. The question why he chooses these two sub-elementary triangles,
instead of the Square and the Equilateral itself, has been much discussed; and
similarly a second question—see below under (4)—why he constructs his
Elementary Squares out of four sub-elementary half-squares instead of two, and
the Elementary Equilateral out of six sub-elementary half-equilaterals instead of
two. (See the first two of the three figures below.)
Concerning the first of these two questions, it seems to have been generally
overlooked that Plato, with his burning interest in the problem of irrationality,
would not have introduced the two irrationalities √2 and √3 (which he explicitly
mentions in 54b) had he not been anxious to introduce precisely these
irrationalities as irreducible elements into his world. (Cornford, Plato’s
Cosmology, pp. 214 and 231 ff., gives a long discussion of both questions, but
the common solution which he offers for both—his ‘hypothesis’ as he calls it on
p. 234—appears to me quite unacceptable; had Plato wanted to achieve some
‘grading’ like the one discussed by Cornford—note that there is no hint in Plato
that anything smaller than what Cornford calls ‘Grade B’ exists—it would have
been sufficient to divide into two the sides of the Elementary Squares and

Equilaterals of what Cornford calls ‘Grade B’, building each of them up from
four elementary figures which do not contain any irrationalities.) But if Plato
was anxious to introduce these irrationalities into the world, as the sides of subelementary triangles of which everything else is composed, then he must have
believed that he could, in this way, solve a problem; and this problem, I suggest,
was that of ‘the nature of (the commensurable and) the uncommensurable’
(Laws, 820c). This problem, clearly, was particularly hard to solve on the basis
of a cosmology which made use of anything like atomistic ideas, since
irrationals are not multiples of any unit able to measure rationals; but if the unit
measures themselves contain sides in ‘irrational ratios’, then the great paradox
might be solved; for then they can measure both, and the existence of irrationals
was no longer incomprehensible or ‘irrational’.
But Plato knew that there were more irrationalities than √2 and √3, for he
mentions in the Theaetetus the discovery of an infinite sequence of irrational
square roots (he also speaks, 148b, of ‘similar considerations concerning solids’,
but this need not refer to cubic roots but could refer to the cubic diagonal, i.e. to
√3); and he also mentions in the Greater Hippias (303b-c; cp. Heath, op. cit.,
304) the fact that by adding (or otherwise composing) irrationals, other irrational
numbers may be obtained (but also rational numbers—probably an allusion to
the fact that, for example, 2 minus √2 is irrational; for this number, plus √2,
gives of course a rational number). In view of these circumstances it appears
that, if Plato wanted to solve the problem of irrationality by way of introducing
his elementary triangles, he must have thought that all irrationals (or at least
their multiples) can be composed by adding up (a) units; (b) √2; (c) √3; and
multiples of these. This, of course, would have been a mistake, but we have
every reason to believe that no disproof existed at the time; and the proposition
that there are only two kinds of atomic irrationalities—the diagonals of the
squares and of cubes—and that all other irrationalities are commensurable
relative to (a) the unit; (b) √2; and (c) √3, has a certain amount of plausibility in
it if we consider the relative character of irrationalities. (I mean the fact that we
may say with equal justification that the diagonal of a square with unit side is
irrational or that the side of a square with a unit diagonal is irrational. We should
also remember that Euclid, in Book X, def. 2, still calls all incommensurable
square roots ‘commensurable by their squares’.) Thus Plato may well have
believed in this proposition, even though he could not possibly have been in the
possession of a valid proof of his conjecture. (A disproof was apparently first
given by Euclid.) Now there is undoubtedly a reference to some unproved
conjecture in the very passage in the Timaeus in which Plato refers to the reason
for choosing his sub-elementary triangles, for he writes (Timaeus, 53c/d): ‘all
triangles are derived from two, each having one right angle ..; of these triangles,
one [the half-square] has on either side half of a right angle,.. and equal sides;
the other [the scalene].. has unequal sides. These two we assume as the first
principles .. according to an account which combines likelihood [or likely
conjecture] with necessity [proof]. Principles which are still further removed
than these are known to heaven, and to such men as heaven favours.’ And later,
after explaining that there is an endless number of scalene triangles, of which
‘the best’ must be selected, and after explaining that he takes the half-equilateral
as the best, Plato says (Timaeus, 543/b; Cornford had to emend the passage in
order to fit it into his interpretation; cp. his note 3 to p. 2 14): ‘The reason is too
long a story; but if anybody puts this matter to the test, and proves that it has this

property, then the prize is his, with all our good will.’ Plato does not say clearly
what ‘this property’ means; it must be a (provable or refutable) mathematical
property which justifies that, having chosen the triangle incorporating √2, the
choice of that incorporating √3 is ‘the best’; and I think that, in view of the
foregoing considerations, the properly which he had in mind was the conjectured
relative rationality of the other irrationals, i.e. relative to the unit, and the square
roots of two and three.
(4) An additional reason for our interpretation, although one for which I do
not find any further evidence in Plato’s text, may perhaps emerge from the
following consideration. It is a curious fact that √2 + √3 very nearly
approximates π (Cp. E. Borel, Space and Time, 1926, 1960, p. 21b; my attention
was drawn to this fact, in a different context, by W. Marinelli.) The excess is
less than 0.0047, i.e. less than 1 1/2 pro mille of π, and a better approximation to
π than 0.0047 was hardly known at the time. A kind of explanation of this
curious fact is that the arithmetical mean of the areas of the circumscribed
hexagon and the inscribed octagon is a good approximation of the area of the
circle Now it appears, on the one hand, that Bryson operated with the means of
circumscribed and inscribed polygons (cp. Heath, op. cit., 224), and we know,
on the other hand (from the Greater Hippias) that Plato was interested in the
adding of irrationals, so that he must have added √2 + √3. There are thus two
ways by which Plato may have found out the approximate equation √2 + √3 = π,
and the second of these ways seems almost inescapable. It seems a plausible
hypothesis that Plato knew of this equation, but was unable to prove whether or
not it was a strict equality or only an approximation.

Plato’s
Elementary
Square,
composed of four sub-elementary
isosceles rectangular triangles.

Plato’s Elementary Equilateral,
composed of six sub-elementary
scalene rectangular triangles.

The rectangle ABCD has an area exceeding that of the circle by less than 1
1/2 pro mille.
But if this is so, then we can perhaps answer the ‘second question’
mentioned above under (3), i.e. the question why Plato composed his elementary
square of four sub-elementary triangles (half-squares) instead of two, and his
elementary equilateral of six sub-elementary triangles (half-equilaterals) instead
of two. If we look at the first two of the figures above, then we see that this
construction emphasizes the centre of the circumscribed and inscribed circles,
and, in both cases, the radii of the circumscribed circle. (In the case of the
equilateral; the radius of the inscribed circle appears also; but it seems that Plato
had that of the circumscribed circle in mind, since he mentions it, in his
description of the method of composing the equilateral, as the ‘diagonal’; cp. the
Timaeus, 54d/e; cp. also 54b.)
If we now draw these two circumscribed circles, or more precisely, if we
inscribe the elementary square and equilateral into a circle with the radius r, then
we find that the sum of the sides of these two figures approximates rπ; in other
words, Plato’s construction suggests one of the simplest approximate solutions
of the squaring of the circle, as our three figures show. In view of all this, it may
easily be the case that Plato’s conjecture and his offer of ‘a prize with all our
good will’, quoted above under (3), involved not only the general problem of the
commensurability of the irrationalities, but also the special problem whether √2
+ √3 squares the unit circle.
I must again emphasize that no direct evidence is known to me to show that
this was in Plato’s mind; but if we consider the indirect evidence here
marshalled, then the hypothesis does perhaps not seem too far-fetched. I do not
think that it is more so than Cornford’s hypothesis; and if true, it would give a
better explanation of the relevant passages.
(5) If there is anything in our contention, developed in section (2) of this
note, that Plato’s inscription meant ‘Arithmetic is not enough; you must know
geometry!’ and in our contention that this emphasis was connected with the
discovery of the irrationality of the square roots of 2 and 3, then this might
throw some light on the Theory of Ideas, and on Aristotle’s much debated
reports. It would explain why, in view of this discovery, the Pythagorean view

that things (forms, shapes) are numbers, and moral ideas ratios of numbers, had
to disappear—perhaps to be replaced, as in the Timaeus, by the doctrine that the
elementary forms, or limits (‘peras’; cp. the passage from the Meno, 75d-76a,
referred to above), or shapes, or ideas of things, are triangles. But it would also
explain why, one generation later, the Academy could return to the Pythagorean
doctrine. Once the shock caused by the discovery of irrationality had worn off,
mathematicians began to get used to the idea that the irrationals must be
numbers, in spite of everything, since they stand in the elementary relations of
greater or less to other (rational) numbers. This stage readied, the reasons
against Pythagoreanism disappeared, although the theory that shapes are
numbers or ratios of numbers meant, after the admission of irrationals,
something different from what it had meant before (a point which possibly was
not fully appreciated by the adherents of the new theory). See also Addendum I,
p. 319, below.*
10
The well-known representation of Themis as blindfolded, i.e.
disregarding the suppliant’s station, and as carrying scales, i.e. as distributing
equality or as balancing the claims and interests of the contesting individuals, is
a symbolic representation of the equalitarian idea of justice. This representation
cannot, however, be used here as an argument in favour of the contention that
this idea was current in Plato’s time; for, as Prof. E. H. Gombrich kindly informs
me, it dates from the Renaissance, and is inspired by a passage in Plutarch’s De
Iside et Osiride, but not by classical Greece. * On the other hand, the
representation of Dike with scales is classical (for such a representation, by
Timochares, one generation after Plato, see R. Eisler, The Royal Art of
Astrology, 114e, pp. 100, 266, and Plate 5), and goes back, probably, to
Hesiod’s identification of the constellation of Virgo with Dike (in view of the
neighbouring scales). And in view of the other evidence given here to show the
association of Justice or Dike with distributive equality, the scales are likely to
mean the same as in the case of Themis.*
11
Republic, 440c-d. The passage concludes with a characteristic sheep-dog
metaphor: ‘Or else, until he has been called back, and calmed down, by the
voice of his own reason, like a dog by his shepherd?’ Cp. note 32 (2) to chapter
4.
12
Plato, in fact, implies this when he twice presents Socrates as rather
doubtful where he should now look out for justice. (Cp. 368b, ff., 432b, ff.)
13
Adam obviously overlooks (under the influence of Plato) the equalitarian
theory in his note to Republic, 331c, ff., where he, probably correctly, says that
‘the view that Justice consists in doing good to friends and harm to enemies, is a
faithful reflection of prevalent Greek morality’. But he is wrong when he adds
that this was ‘an all but universal view’; for he forgets his own evidence (note to
561e28), which shows that equality before the laws (‘isonomy’) ‘was the proud
claim of democracy’. See also notes 14 and 17 to this chapter.
One of the oldest (if not the oldest) reference to ‘isonomy’ is to be found in
a fragment due to Alcmaeon the physician (early fifth century; see Diels5,
chapter 24, fr. 4); he speaks of isonomy as a condition of health, and opposes it
to ‘monarchy’—the dominance of one over many. Here we have a political
theory of the body, or more precisely, of human physiology. Cp. also notes 32 to
chapter 5 and 59 to chapter 10.
14
A passing reference to equality (similar to that in the Gorgias, 483c/d; see
also this note, below, and note 47 to this chapter) is made in Glaucon’s speech in

Republic, 359c; but the issue is not taken up. (For this passage cp. note 50 to this
chapter.)
In Plato’s abusive attack upon democracy (see text to notes 14-18, chapter
4), three scornful jocular references to equalitarianism occur. The first is a
remark to the effect that democracy ‘distributes equality to equals and to
unequals alike’ (558c; cp. Adam’s note to 558c16; see also note 21 to this
chapter); this is intended as an ironical criticism. (Equality has been connected
with democracy before, viz. in the description of the democratic revolution; cp.
Rep., 557a, quoted in the text to note 13, chapter 4.) The second characterizes
the ‘democratic man’ as gratifying all his desires ‘equally’, whether they may be
good or bad; he is therefore called an ‘equalitarianist’ (‘isonomist’), a punning
allusion to the idea of ‘equal laws for all’ or ‘equality before the law’
(‘isonomy’; cp. notes 13 and 17 to this chapter). This pun occurs in Republic,
561e. The way for it is well paved, since the word ‘equal’ has already been used
three times (Rep., 561b and c) to characterize an attitude of the man to whom all
desires and whims are ‘equal’. The third of these cheap cracks is an appeal to
the reader’s imagination, typical even nowadays of this kind of propaganda: ‘I
nearly forgot to mention the great role played by these famous “equal laws”, and
by this famous “liberty”, in the interrelations between men and women ..’ (Rep.,
563b).
Besides the evidence of the importance of equalitarianism mentioned here
(and in the text to notes 9-10 to this chapter), we must consider especially
Plato’s own testimony in (1) the Gorgias, where he writes (488e/489a; see also
notes 47, 48, and 50 to the present chapter): ‘Does not the multitude (i.e. here:
the majority of the people) believe .. that justice is equality?’
(2) The Menexenus (238e—239a; see note 19 to this chapter, and text). The
passages in the Laws on equality are later than the Republic, and cannot be used
as testimony for Plato’s awareness of the issue when writing the Republic; but
see text to notes 9, 20 and 21 to this chapter.
16
Plato himself says, in connection with the third remark (563b; cp. the last
note): ‘Shall we utter whatever rises to our lips?’; by which he apparently
wishes to indicate that he does not see any reason to suppress the joke.
16
I believe that Thucydides’ (II, 37 ff.) version of Pericles’ oration can be
taken as practically authentic. In all likelihood, he was present when Pericles
spoke; and in any case he would have reconstructed it as faithfully as possible.
There is much reason to believe that in those times it was not extraordinary for a
man to learn another’s oration even by heart (cp. Plato’s Phaedrus), and a
faithful reconstruction of a speech of this kind is indeed not as difficult as one
might think. Plato knew the oration, taking either Thucydides’ version or
another source, which must have been extremely similar to it, as authentic. Cp.
also notes 31 and 34/35 to chapter 10. (It may be mentioned here that early in
his career, Pericles had made rather dubious concessions to the popular tribal
instincts and to the equally popular group egoism of the people; I have in mind
the legislation concerning citizenship in 451 B.C. But later he revised his
attitude towards these matters, probably under the influence of such men as
Protagoras.)
17
Cp. Herodotus, III, 80, and especially the eulogy on ‘isonomy’, i.e.
equality before the law (III, 80, 6); see also notes 13 and 14 to this chapter. The
passage from Herodotus, which influenced Plato in other ways also (cp. note 24

to chapter 4), is one which Plato ridicules in the Republic just as he ridicules
Pericles’ oration; cp. note 14 to chapter 4, and 34 to chapter 10.
18
Even the naturalist Aristotle does not always refer to this naturalistic
version of equalitarianism; for instance, his formulation of the principles of
democracy in Politics, 1317b (cp. note 9 to this chapter, and text), is quite
independent of it. But it is perhaps even more interesting that in the Gorgias, in
which the opposition of nature and convention plays such an important role,
Plato presents equalitarianism without burdening it with the dubious theory of
the natural equality of all men (see 488e/489a, quoted in note 14 to this chapter,
and 483d, 484a, and 508a).
19
Cp. Menexenus, 238e/239a. The passage immediately follows a clear
allusion to Pericles’ oration (viz., to the second sentence quoted in the text to
note 17, in this chapter).—It seems not improbable that the reiteration of the
term ‘equal birth’ in that passage is meant as a scornful allusion to the ‘low’
birth of Pericles’ and Aspasia’s sons, who were recognized as Athenian citizens
only by special legislation in 429 B.C. (Cp. E. Meyer, Gesch. d. Altertums, vol.
IV, p. 14, note to No. 392, and p. 323, No. 558.)
It has been held (even by Grote; cp. his Plato, III, p. 11) that Plato in the
Menexenus, ‘in his own rhetorical discourse,.. drops the ironical vein’, i.e. that
the middle part of the Menexenus, from which the quotation in the text is taken,
is not meant ironically. But in view of the quoted passage on equality, and in
view of Plato’s open scorn in the Republic when he deals with this point (cp.
note 14 to this chapter), this opinion seems to me untenable. And it appears to
me equally impossible to doubt the ironical character of the passage
immediately preceding the one quoted in the text where Plato says of Athens
(cp. 238c/d): ‘In this time as well as at present .. our government was always an
aristocracy ..; though it is sometimes called a democracy, it is really an
aristocracy, that is to say, a rule of the best, with the approval of the many ..’ In
view of Plato’s hatred of democracy, this description needs no further comment.
* Another undoubtedly ironical passage is 245c-d (cp. note 48 to chapter 8)
where ‘Socrates’ praises Athens for its consistent hatred of foreigners and
barbarians. Since elsewhere (in the Republic, 562e, f., quoted in note 48 to
chapter 8) in an attack on democracy—and this means Athenian democracy—
Plato scorns Athens because of its liberal treatment of foreigners, his praise in
the Menexenus cannot be anything but irony; again the liberality of Athens is
ridiculed by a pro-Spartan partisan. (Strangers were forbidden to reside in
Sparta, by a law of Lycurgus; cp. Aristophanes’ Birds, 1012.) It is interesting, in
this connection, that in the Menexenus (236a; cp. note 15 (1) to chapter 10)
where ‘Socrates’ is an orator who attacks Athens, Plato says of ‘Socrates’ that
he was a pupil of the oligarchic party leader Antiphon the Orator (of Rhamnus;
not to be confused with Antiphon the Sophist, who was an Athenian); especially
in view of the fact that ‘Socrates’ produces a parody of a speech recorded by
Thucydides, who in fact seems to have been a pupil of Antiphon whom he
greatly admired.* For the genuineness of the Menexenus, see also note 35 to
chapter 10.
20
Laws, 757a; cp. the whole passage, 757a-e, of which the main parts are
quoted above, in note 9 (1) to this chapter.
(1) For what I call the standard objection against equalitarianism, cp. also
Laws, 744b, ff. ‘It would be excellent if everybody could .. have all things equal;
but since this is impossible ..’, etc. The passage is especially interesting in view

of the fact that Plato is often described as an enemy of plutocracy by many
writers who judge him only by the Republic. But in this important passage of the
Laws (i.e. 744b, ff.) Plato demands that ‘political offices, and contributions, as
well as distributions, should be proportional to the value of a citizen’s wealth.
And they should depend not only on his virtue or that of his ancestors or on the
size of his body and his good looks, but also upon his wealth or his poverty. In
this way, a man will receive honours and offices as equitably as possible, i.e. in
proportion to his wealth, although according to a principle of unequal
distribution.’ * The doctrine of the unequal distribution of honour and, we may
assume, of spoils, in proportion to wealth and bodily size, is probably a residue
from the heroic age of conquest. The wealthy who are heavily and expensively
armed, and those who are strong, contribute more to the victory than the others.
(The principle was accepted in Homeric times, and it can be found, as R. Eisler
assures me, in practically all known cases of conquering war hordes.) * The
basic idea of this attitude, viz., that it is unjust to treat unequals equally, can be
found, in a passing remark, as early as the Protagoras, 337a (see also Gorgias,
508a, f., mentioned in notes 9 and 48 to this chapter); but Plato did not make
much use of the idea before writing the Laws.
(2) For Aristotle’s elaboration of these ideas, cp. esp. his Politics, III, 9, 1,
1280a (see also 1282b-1284b and 1301b29), where he writes: ‘All men cling to
justice of some kind, but their conceptions are imperfect, and do not embrace the
whole Idea. For example, justice is thought (by democrats) to be equality; and so
it is, although it is not equality for all, but only for equals. And justice is thought
(by oligarchs) to be inequality; and so it is, although it is not inequality for all,
but only for unequals.’ Cp. also Nicom. Eth., 1131b27, 1158b30 ff.
(3) Against all this anti-equalitarianism, I hold, with Kant, that it must be
the principle of all morality that no man should consider himself more valuable
than any other person. And I assert that this principle is the only one acceptable,
considering the notorious impossibility of judging oneself impartially. I am
therefore at a loss to understand the following remark of an excellent writer like
Catlin (Principles, 314): ‘There is something profoundly immoral in the
morality of Kant which endeavours to roll all personalities level .. and which
ignores the Aristotelian precept to render equals to equals and unequals to
unequals. One man has not socially the same rights as another .. The present
writer would by no means be prepared to deny that .. there is something in
“blood”.’ Now I ask: If there were something in ‘blood’, or in inequality of
talents, etc.; and even if it were worth while to waste one’s time in assessing
these differences; and even if one could assess them; why, then, should they be
made the ground of greater rights and not only of heavier duties? (Cp. text to
notes 31/32 to chapter 4.) I fail to see the profound immorality of Kant’s
equalitarianism. And I fail to see on what Catlin bases his moral judgement,
since he considers morals to be a matter of taste. Why should Kant’s ‘taste’ be
profoundly immoral? (It is also the Christian ‘taste’.) The only reply to this
question that I can think of is that Catlin judges from his positivistic point of
view (cp. note 18 (2) to chapter 5), and that he thinks the Christian and Kantian
demand immoral because it contradicts the positively enforced moral valuations
of our contemporary society.
(4) One of the best answers ever given to all these anti-equalitarianists is
due to Rousseau. I say this in spite of my opinion that his romanticism (cp. note
1 to this chapter) was one of the most pernicious influences in the history of

social philosophy. But he was also one of the few really brilliant writers in this
field. I quote one of his excellent remarks from the Origin of Inequality (see, for
instance, the Everyman edition of the Social Contract, p. 174; the italics are
mine); and I wish to draw the reader’s attention to the dignified formulation of
the last sentence of this passage. ‘I conceive that there are two kinds of
inequality among the human species; one, which I call natural or physical
because it is established by nature, and consists in a difference of age, health,
bodily strength, and the qualities of the mind or of the soul; and another, which
may be called moral or political inequality, because it depends on a kind of
convention, and is established, or at least authorized, by the consent of men.
This latter consists of the different privileges, which some men enjoy ..; such as
that of being more rich, more honoured, or more powerful ... It is useless to ask
what is the source of natural inequality, because that question is answered by the
simple definition of the word. Again, it is still more useless to inquire whether
there is any essential connection between the two inequalities; for this would be
only asking, in other words, whether those who command are necessarily better
than those who obey, and whether strength of body or of mind, or wisdom, or
virtue, are always found .. in proportion to the power or wealth of a man; a
question fit perhaps to be discussed by slaves in the hearing of their masters, but
highly unbecoming to reasonable and free men in search of the truth.’
21
Republic, 558c; cp. note 14 to this chapter (the first passage in the attack
on democracy).
22
Republic, 433b. Adam, who also recognizes that the passage is intended
as an argument, tries to reconstruct the argument (note to 433b11); but he
confesses that ‘Plato seldom leaves so much to be mentally supplied in his
reasoning’.
23
Republic, 433e/434a.—For a continuation of the passage, cp. text to note
40 to this chapter; for the preparation for it in earlier parts of the Republic, see
note 6 to this chapter.—Adam comments on the passage which I call the ‘second
argument’ as follows (note to 433e35): ‘Plato is looking for a point of contact
between his own view of Justice and the popular judicial meaning of the word ..’
(See the passage quoted in the next paragraph in the text.) Adam tries to defend
Plato’s argument against a critic (Krohn) who saw, though perhaps not very
clearly, that there was something wrong with it.
24
The quotations in this paragraph are from Republic, 430d, ff.
25
This device seems to have been successful even with a keen critic such as
Gomperz, who, in his brief criticism (Greek Thinkers. Book V, II, 10; Germ, ed.,
vol. II, pp. 378/379), fails to mention the weaknesses of the argument; and he
even says, commenting upon the first two books (V, II, 5; p. 368): ‘An
exposition follows which might be described as a miracle of clarity, precision,
and genuine scientific character ..’, adding that Plato’s interlocutors Glaucon
and Adeimantus, ‘driven by their burning enthusiasm .. dismiss and forestall all
superficial solutions’.
For my remarks on temperance, in the next paragraph of the text, see the
following passage from Davies’ and Vaughan’s ‘Analysis’ (cp. the Golden
Treasury edition of the Republic, p. xviii; italics mine): ‘The essence of
temperance is restraint. The essence of political temperance lies in recognizing
the right of the governing body to the allegiance and obedience of the
governed.’ This may show that my interpretation of Plato’s idea of temperance
is shared (though expressed in a different terminology) by followers of Plato. I

may add that ‘temperance’, i.e. being satisfied with one’s place, is a virtue in
which all three classes share, although it is the only virtue in which the workers
may participate. Thus the virtue attainable by the workers or money-earners is
temperance; the virtues attainable by the auxiliaries are temperance and courage;
by the guardians, temperance, courage, and wisdom.
The ‘lengthy preface’, also quoted in the next paragraph, is from Republic,
432b, ff.
26
On the term ‘collectivism’, a terminological comment may be made here.
What H. G. Wells calls ‘collectivism’ has nothing to do with what I call by that
name. Wells is an individualist (in my sense of the word), as is shown especially
by his Rights of Man and his Common Sense of War and Peace, which contain
very acceptable formulations of the demands of an equalitarian individualism.
But he also believes, rightly, in the rational planning of political institutions,
with the aim of furthering the freedom and the welfare of individual human
beings. This he calls ‘collectivism’; to describe what I believe to be the same
thing as his ‘collectivism’, I should use an expression like: ‘rational institutional
planning for freedom’. This expression may be long and clumsy, but it avoids
the danger that ‘collectivism’ may be interpreted in the anti-individualistic sense
in which it is often used, not only in the present book.
27
Laws, 903c; cp. text to note 35, chapter 5. The ‘preamble’ mentioned in
the text (‘But he needs .. some words of counsel to act as a charm upon him’,
etc.) is Laws, 903b.
28
There are innumerable places in the Republic and in the Laws where Plato
gives a warning against unbridled group egoism; cp., for instance, Republic,
519e, and the passages referred to in note 41 to this chapter.
Regarding the identity often alleged to exist between collectivism and
altruism, I may refer, in this connection, to the very pertinent question of
Sherrington, who asks in Man on His Nature (p. 388): ‘Are the shoal and the
herd altruism?’
29
For Dickens’ mistaken contempt of Parliament, cp. also note 23 to
chapter 7.
30
Aristotle’s Politics, III, 12, 1 (1282b); cp. text to notes 9 and 20, to this
chapter. (Cp. also Aristotle’s remark in Pol., III, 9, 3, 1280a, to the effect that
justice pertains to persons as well as to things.) With the quotation from Pericles
later in this paragraph, cp. text to note 16 to this chapter, and to note 31 to
chapter 10.
31
This remark is from a passage (Rep., 519e, f.) quoted in the text to note
35 to chapter 5.
32
The important passages from the Laws quoted (1) in the present and (2) in
the next paragraph are:
(1) Laws, 739c, ff. Plato refers here to the Republic, and apparently
especially to Republic, 462a ff., 424a, and 449e. (A list of passages on
collectivism and holism can be found in note 35 to chapter 5. On his
communism, see note 29 (2) to chapter 5 and other places there mentioned.) The
passage here quoted begins, characteristically, with a quotation of the
Pythagorean maxim ‘Friends have in common all things they possess’. Cp. note
36 and text; also the ‘common meals’ mentioned in note 34.
(2) Laws, 942a, f.; see next note. Both these passages are referred 10 as
anti-individualistic by Gomperz (op. cit., vol. II, 406). Sec also Laws, 807d/e.

33

Cp. note 42, chapter 4, and text.—The quotation which follows in the
present paragraph is Laws, 942a, f. (see the preceding note).
We must not forget that military education in the Laws (as in the Republic)
is obligatory for all those allowed to carry arms, i.e. for all citizens—for all
those who have anything like civil rights (cp. Laws, 753b). All others are
‘banausic’, if not slaves (cp. Laws, 741e and 743d, and note 4 to chapter 11).
It is interesting that Barker, who hates militarism, believes that Plato held
similar views (Greek Political Theory, 298-301). It is true that Plato did not
eulogize war, and that he even spoke against war. But many militarists have
talked peace and practised war; and Plato’s state is ruled by the military caste,
i.e. by the wise ex-soldiers. This remark is as true for the Laws (cp. 753b) as it is
for the Republic.
34
Strictest legislation about meals—especially ‘common meals’—and also
about drinking habits plays a considerable part in Plato; cp., for instance,
Republic, 416e, 458c, 547d/e; Laws, 625e, 633a (where the obligatory common
meals are said to be instituted with a view to war), 762b, 780-783, 806c, f, 839c,
842b. Plato always emphasizes the importance of common meals, in accordance
with Cretan and Spartan customs. Interesting also is the preoccupation of Plato’s
uncle Critias with these matters. (Cp. Diels2, Critias, fr. 33.)
With the allusion to the anarchy of the ‘wild beasts’, at the end of the
present quotation, cp. also Republic, 563c.
35
Cp. E. B. England’s edition of the Laws, vol. I, p. 514, note to 739b8 ff.
The quotations from Barker are from op. cit.; pp. 149 and 148. Countless similar
passages can be found in the writings of most Platonists. See however
Sherrington’s remark (cp. note 28 to this chapter) that it is hardly correct to say
that a shoal or a herd is inspired by altruism. Herd instinct and tribal egoism, and
the appeal to these instincts, should not be mixed up with unselfishness.
36
Cp. Republic, 424a, 449c; Phaedrus, 279c; Laws, 739c; see note 32 (1).
(Cp. also Lysis., 207c, and Euripides, Orest., 725.) For the possible connection
of this principle with early Christian and Marxian communism, see note 29 (2)
to chapter 5.
Regarding the individualistic theory of justice and injustice of the Gorgias,
cp. for instance the examples given in the Gorgias, 468b, ff., 508d/e. These
passages probably still show Socratic influence (cp. note 56 to chapter 10).
Socrates’ individualism is most clearly expressed in his famous doctrine of the
self-sufficiency of the good man; a doctrine which is mentioned by Plato in the
Republic (387d/e) in spite of the fact that it flatly contradicts one of the main
theses of the Republic, viz., that the state alone can be self-sufficient. (Cp.
chapter 5, note 25, and the text to that and the following notes.)
37
Republic, 368b/c.
38
Cp. especially Republic, 344a, ff.
39
Cp. Laws, 923b.
40
Republic, 434a-c. (Cp. also text to note 6 and note 23 to this chapter, and
notes 27 (3) and 31 to chapter 4.)
41
Republic, 466b/c. Cp. also the Laws, 715b/c, and many other passages
against the anti-holistic misuse of class prerogatives. See also note 28 to this
chapter, and note 25 (4) to chapter 7.
42
The problem here alluded to is that of the ‘paradox of freedom’; cp. note
4 to chapter 7.—For the problem of state control in education, see note 13 to
chapter 7.

43

Cp. Aristotle, Politics, III, 9, 6 ff. (1280a). Cp. Burke, French Revolution
(ed. 1815; vol. V, 184; the passage is aptly quoted by Jowett in his notes to the
passage of Aristotle’s; see his edition of Aristotle’s Politics, vol. II, 126).
The quotation from Aristotle later in the paragraph is op. cit., III, 9, 8,
(1280b).
Field, for instance, proffers a similar criticism (in his Plato and His
Contemporaries, 117): ‘There is no question of the city and its laws exercising
any educative effect on the moral character of its citizens.’ However, Green has
clearly shown (in his Lectures on Political Obligation) that it is impossible for
the state to enforce morality by law. He would certainly have agreed with the
formula: ‘We want to moralize politics, and not to politicize morals.’ (See end
of this paragraph in the text.) Green’s view is foreshadowed by Spinoza (Tract.
Theol. Pol., chapter 20): ‘He who seeks to regulate everything by law is more
likely to encourage vice than to smother it.’
44
I consider the analogy between civil peace and international peace, and
between ordinary crime and international crime, as fundamental for any attempt
to get international crime under control. For this analogy and its limitations as
well as for the poverty of the historicist method in such problems, cp. note 7 to
chapter 9.
* Among those who consider rational methods for the establishment of
international peace as a Utopian dream, H. J. Morgenthau may be mentioned
(cp. his book, Scientific Man versus Power Politics, English edition, 1947).
Morgenthau’s position can be summed up as that of a disappointed historicist.
He realizes that historical predictions are impossible; but since he assumes
(with, for example, the Marxists) that the field of applicability of reason (or of
the scientific method) is limited to the field of predictability, he concludes from
the impredictability of historical events that reason is inapplicable to the field of
international affairs.
The conclusion does not follow, because scientific prediction and prediction
in the sense of historical prophecy are not the same. (None of the natural
sciences, with practically the sole exception of the theory of the solar system,
attempts anything resembling historical prophecy.) The task of the social
sciences is not to predict ‘trends’ or ‘tendencies’ of development, nor is this the
task of the natural sciences. ‘The best the so-called “social laws” can do is
exactly the best the so-called “natural laws” can do, namely, to indicate certain
trends .. Which conditions will actually occur and help one particular trend to
materialize, neither the natural nor the social sciences are able to foretell. Nor
are they able to forecast with more than a high degree of probability that in the
presence of certain conditions a certain trend will materialize’, writes
Morgenthau (pp. 120 ff.; italics mine). But the natural sciences do not attempt
the prediction of trends, and only historicists believe that they, and the social
sciences, have such aims. Accordingly, the realization that these aims are not
realizable will disappoint only the historicist. ‘Many .. political scientists,
however, claim that they can .. actually .. predict social events with a high
degree of certainty. In fact, they .. are the victims of .. delusions’, writes
Morgenthau. I certainly agree; but this merely shows that historicism is to be
repudiated. To assume, however, that the repudiation of historicism means the
repudiation of rationalism in politics reveals a fundamentally historicist
prejudice—the prejudice, namely, that historical prophecy is the basis of any
rational politics. (I have mentioned this view as characteristic of historicism in

the beginning of chapter 1.) Morgenthau ridicules all attempts to bring power
under the control of reason, and to suppress war, as springing from a rationalism
and scientism which is inapplicable to society by its very essence. But clearly,
he proves too much. Civil peace has been established in many societies, in spite
of that essential lust for power which, according to Morgenthau’s theory, should
prevent it. He admits the fact, of course, but does not see that it destroys the
theoretical basis of his romantic contentions.*
45
The quotation is from Aristotle’s Politics, III, 9, 8, (1280).
(1) I say in the text ‘furthermore’ because I believe that the passages alluded
to in the text, i.e. Politics, III, 9, 6, and III, 9, 12, are likely to represent
Lycophron’s views also. My reasons for believing this are the following. From
III, 9, 6, to III, 9, 12, Aristotle is engaged in a criticism of the doctrine I have
called protectionism. In III, 9, 8, quoted in the text, he directly attributes to
Lycophron a concise and perfectly clear formulation of this doctrine. From
Aristotle’s other references to Lycophron (see (2) in this note), it is probable that
Lycophron’s age was such that he must have been, if not the first, at least one of
the first to formulate protectionism. Thus it seems reasonable to assume
(although it is anything but certain) that the whole attack upon protectionism,
i.e. III, 9, 6, to III, 9, 12, is directed against Lycophron, and that the various but
equivalent formulations of protectionism are all his. (It may also be mentioned
that Plato describes protectionism as a ‘common view’ in Rep., 358c.)
Aristotle’s objections are all intended to show that the protectionist theory is
unable to account for the local as well as the internal unity of the state. It
overlooks, he holds (III, 9, 6), the fact that the state exists for the sake of the
good life in which neither slaves nor beasts can have a share (i.e. for the good
life of the virtuous landed proprietor, for everybody who earns money is by his
‘banausic’ occupation prevented from citizenship). It also overlooks the tribal
unity of the ‘true’ state which is (III, 9, 12) ‘a community of well-being in
families, and an aggregation of families, for the sake of a complete and selfsufficient life .. established among men who live in the same place, and who
intermarry’.
(2) For Lycophron’s equalitarianism, see note 13 to chapter 5.—Jowett (in
Aristotle’s Politics, II, 126) describes Lycophron as ‘an obscure rhetorician’; but
Aristotle must have thought otherwise, since in his extant writings he mentions
Lycophron at least six times. (In Pol., Rhet., Fragm., Metaph., Phys., Soph. El.)
It is unlikely that Lycophron was much younger than Alcidamas, his
colleague in Gorgias’ school, since his equalitarianism would hardly have
attracted so much attention if it had become known after Alcidamas had
succeeded Gorgias as the head of the school. Lycophron’s epistemological
interests (mentioned by Aristotle in Metaphysics, 1045b9, and Physics, 185b27)
are also a case in point, since they make it probable that he was a pupil of
Gorgias’ earlier period, i.e. before Gorgias confined himself practically
exclusively to rhetoric. Of course, any opinion on Lycophron must be highly
speculative, owing to the scanty information we have.
46
Barker, Greek Political Theory, I, p. 160. For Flume’s criticism of the
historical version of the contract theory, see note 43 to chapter 4. Concerning
Barker’s further contention (p. 161) that Plato’s justice, as opposed to that of the
contract theory, is not ‘something external’, but rather, internal to the soul, I
may remind the reader of Plato’s frequent recommendations of most severe
sanctions by which justice may be achieved; he always recommends the use of

persuasion and force’ (cp. notes 5, 10 and 18 to chapter 8). On the other hand,
some modern democratic states have shown that it is Possible to be liberal and
lenient without increasing criminality.
With my remark that Barker sees in Lycophron (as I do) the originator of
the contract theory, cp. Barker, op. cit., p. 63: ‘Protagoras did not anticipate the
Sophist Lycophron in founding the doctrine of Contract.’ (Cp. with this the text
to note 27 to chapter 5.)
47
Cp. Gorgias, 483c, f.
48
Cp. Gorgias, 488e-489b; see also 52/0.
From the way in which Socrates replies here to Callicles, it seems possible
that the historical Socrates (cp. note 56 to chapter 10) may have countered the
arguments in support of a biological naturalism of Pindar’s type by arguing like
this: If it is natural that the stronger should rule, then it is also natural that
equality should rule, since the multitude which shows its strength by the fact that
it rules demands equality. In other words, he may have shown the empty,
ambiguous character of the naturalistic demand. And his success might have
inspired Plato to proffer his own version of naturalism.
I do not wish to assert that Socrates’ later remark (508a) on ‘geometrical
equality’ must necessarily be interpreted as anti-equalitarian, i.e. why it must
mean the same as the ‘proportionate equity’ of the Laws, 744b, ff., and 757a-e
(cp. notes 9 and 20 (1) to this chapter). This is what Adam suggests in his
second note to Republic, 558c15. But perhaps there is something in his
suggestion; for the ‘geometrical’ equality of the Gorgias, 508a, seems to allude
to Pythagorean problems (cp. note 56 (6) to chapter 10; see also the remarks in
that note on the Cratylus) and may well be an allusion to ‘geometrical
proportions’.
49
Republic, 358e. Glaucon disclaims the authorship in 358c. In reading this
passage, the reader’s attention is easily distracted by the issue ‘nature versus
convention’, which plays a major role in this passage as well as in Callicles’
speech in the Gorgias. However, Plato’s major concern in the Republic is not to
defeat conventionalism, but to denounce the rational protectionist approach as
selfish. (That the conventionalist contract theory was not Plato’s main enemy
emerges from notes 27-28 to chapter 5, and text.)
50
If we compare Plato’s presentation of protectionism in the Republic with
that in the Gorgias, then we find that it is indeed the same theory, although in
the Republic much less emphasis is laid on equality. But even equality is
mentioned, although only in passing, viz., in Republic, 359c: ‘Nature .., by
conventional law, is twisted round and compelled by force to honour equality.’
This remark increases the similarity with Callicles’ speech. (See Gorgias, esp.
483c/d.) But as opposed to the Gorgias, Plato drops equality at once (or rather,
he does not even take the issue up) and never returns to it; which makes it only
the more obvious that he was at pains to avoid the problem. Instead, Plato revels
in the description of the cynical egoism which he presents as the only source
from which protectionism springs. (For Plato’s silence on equalitarianism, cp.
especially note 14 to this chapter, and text.) A. E. Taylor, Plato: The Man and
His Work (1926), p. 268, contends that while Callicles starts from ‘nature’,
Glaucon starts from ‘convention’.
51
Cp. Republic, 359a; my further allusions in the text are to 359b, 360d, ff.;
see also 358c. For the ‘rubbing in’, cp. 359a-362c and the elaboration down to
367e. Plato’s description of the nihilistic tendencies of protectionism fills

altogether nine pages in the Everyman edition of the Republic; an indication of
the significance Plato attached to it. (There is a parallel passage in the Laws,
800a, f.)
52
When Glaucon has finished his presentation, Adeimantus takes his place
(with a very interesting and indeed most pertinent challenge to Socrates to
criticize utilitarianism), yet not until Socrates has stated that he thinks Glaucon’s
presentation an excellent one (362d). Adeimantus’ speech is an amendment of
Glaucon’s, and it reiterates the claim that what I call protectionism derives from
Thrasymachus’ nihilism (see especially 367a, ff.) After Adeimantus, Socrates
himself speaks, full of admiration for Glaucon as well as Adeimantus, because
their belief in justice is unshaken in spite of the fact that they presented the case
for injustice so excellently, i.e. the theory that it is good to inflict injustice as
long as one can ‘get away with it’. By emphasizing the excellence of the
arguments proffered by Glaucon and Adeimantus, ‘Socrates’ (i.e. Plato) implies
that these arguments are a fair presentation of the views discussed; and he
ultimately states his own theory, not in order to show that Glaucon’s
representation needs emendation, but, as he emphasizes, in order to show that,
contrary to the opinions of the protectionists, justice is good, and injustice evil.
(It should not be forgotten—cp. note 49 to this chapter—that Plato’s attack is
not directed against the contract theory as such but solely against protectionism;
for the contract theory is soon (Rep., 369b-c; cp. text to note 29 to chapter 5)
adopted by Plato himself, at least partially; including the theory that people
‘gather into settlements’ because ‘every one expects in this way to further his
own interests’.)
It must also be mentioned that the passage culminates with the impressive
remark of ‘Socrates’ quoted in the text to note 37 to this chapter. This shows that
Plato combats protectionism only by presenting it as an immoral and indeed
unholy form of egoism.
Finally, in forming our judgement on Plato’s procedure, we must not forget
that Plato likes to argue against rhetoric and sophistry; and indeed, that he is the
man who by his attacks on the ‘Sophists’ created the bad associations connected
with that word. I believe that we therefore have every reason to censor him
when he himself makes use of rhetoric and sophistry in place of argument. (Cp.
also note 10 to chapter 8.)
53
We may take Adam and Barker as representative of the Platonists
mentioned here. Adam says (note to 358e, ff.) of Glaucon that he resuscitates
Thrasymachus’ theory, and he says (note to 373a, ff.) of Thrasymachus that his
is ‘the same theory which is afterwards (in 358e, ff.) represented by Glaucon’.
Barker says (op. cit., 159) of the theory which I call protectionism and which he
calls ‘pragmatism’, that it is ‘in the same spirit as Thrasymachus’.
54
That the great sceptic Carneades believed in Plato’s presentation can be
seen from Cicero (De Republica, III, 8; 13; 23), where Glaucon’s version is
presented, practically without alteration, as the theory adopted by Carneades.
(See also text to notes 65 and 66 and note 56 to chapter 10.)
In this connection I may express my opinion, that one can find a great deal
of comfort in the fact that anti-humanitarians have always found it necessary to
appeal to our humanitarian sentiments; and also in the fact that they have
frequently succeeded in persuading us of their sincerity. It shows that they are
well aware that these sentiments are deeply rooted in most of us, and that the
despised ‘many’ are too good, too candid, and too guileless, rather than too bad;

while they are even ready to be told by their often unscrupulous ‘betters’ that
they are unworthy and materialistically minded egoists who only want to ‘fill
their bellies like the beasts’.

Notes To Chapter 7
The motto to this chapter is from the Laws, 690b. (Cp. note 28 to chapter 5.)
1
Cp. text to notes 2/3 to chapter 6.
2
Similar ideas have been expressed by J. S. Mill; thus he writes in his Logic
(1st ed., p. 557 f.): ‘Although the actions of rulers are by no means Wholly
determined by their selfish interests, it is as security against those selfish
interests that constitutional checks are required.’ Similarly he writes in The
Subjection of Women (p. 251 of the Everyman edition; italics mine): ‘Who
doubts that there may be great goodness, and great happiness and great
affection, under the absolute government of a good man? Meanwhile laws and
institutions require to be adapted, not to good men, but to bad.’ Much as I agree
with the sentence in italics, I feel that the admission contained in the first part of
the sentence is not really called for. (Cp. especially note 25 (3) to this chapter.)
A similar admission may be found in an excellent passage of his Representative
Government (1861; see especially p. 49) where Mill combats the Platonic ideal
of the philosopher king because, especially if his rule should be a benevolent
one, it will involve the ‘abdication’ of the ordinary citizen’s will, and ability, to
judge a policy.
It may be remarked that this admission of J. S. Mill’s was part of an attempt
to resolve the conflict between James Mill’s Essay on Government and
‘Macaulay’s famous attack’ on it (as J. S. Mill calls it; cp. his Autobiography,
chapter V, One Stage Onward; 1st edition, 187a, pp. 157-61; Macaulay’s
criticisms were first published in the Edinburgh Review, March 1829, June
1829, and October 1829). This conflict played a great role in J. S. Mill’s
development; his attempt to resolve it determined, indeed, the ultimate aim and
character of his Logic (‘the principle chapters of what I afterwards published on
the Logic of the Moral Sciences’) as we hear from his Autobiography.
The resolution of the conflict between his father and Macaulay which J. S.
Mill proposes is this. He says that his father was right in believing that politics
was a deductive science, but wrong in believing that ‘the type of deduction
(was) that of .. pure geometry’, while Macaulay was right in believing that it
was more experimental than this, but wrong in believing that it was like ‘the
purely experimental method of chemistry’. The true solution according to J. S.
Mill (Autobiography, pp. 159 ff.) is this: the appropriate method of politics is the
deductive one of dynamics—a method which, he believes, is characterized by
the summation of effects as exemplified in the ‘principle of the Composition of
Forces’. (That this idea of J. S. Mill survived at any rate down to 1937 is shown
in my The Poverty of Historicism, p. 63.) I do not think that there is very much
in this analysis (which is based, apart from other things, upon a misinterpretation
of dynamics and chemistry). Yet so much would seem to be defensible.
James Mill, like many before and after him, tried to ‘deduce the science of
government from the principles of human nature’ as Macaulay said (towards the
end of his first paper), and Macaulay was right, I think, to describe this attempt
as ‘utterly impossible’. Also, Macaulay’s method could perhaps be described as
more empirical, in so far as he made full use of historical facts for the purpose of

refuting J. Mill’s dogmatic theories. But the method which he practised has
nothing to do with that of chemistry, or with that which J. S. Mill believed to be
the method of chemistry (or with the Baconian inductive method which, irritated
by J. Mill’s syllogisms, Macaulay praised). It was simply the method of
rejecting invalid logical demonstrations in a field in which nothing of interest
can be logically demonstrated, and of discussing theories and possible situations,
in the light of alternative theories and of alternative possibilities, and of factual
historical evidence. One of the main points at issue was that J. Mill believed that
he had demonstrated the necessity for monarchy and aristocracy to produce a
rule of terror—a point which was easily refuted by examples. J. S. Mill’s two
passages quoted at the beginning of this note show the influence of this
refutation. Macaulay always emphasized that he only wanted to reject Mill’s
proofs, and not to pronounce on the truth or falsity of his alleged conclusions.
This alone should have made it clear that he did not attempt to practise the
inductive method which he praised.
3
Cp. for instance E. Meyer’s remark (Gesch. d. Altertums, V, p. 4) that
‘power is, in its very essence, indivisible’.
4
Cp. Republic, 562b-565e. In the text, I am alluding especially to 562c:
‘Does not the excess’ (of liberty) ‘bring men to such a state that they badly want
a tyranny?’ Cp. furthermore 563d/e: ‘And in the end, as you know well enough,
they just do not take any notice of the laws, whether written or unwritten, since
they want to have no despot of any kind over them. This then is the origin out of
which tyranny springs.’ (For the beginning of this passage, see note 19 to
chapter 4.)
Other remarks of Plato’s on the paradoxes of freedom and of democracy
are: Republic, 564a: ‘Then too much freedom is liable to change into nothing
else but too much slavery, in the individual as well as in the state .. Hence it is
reasonable to assume that tyranny is enthroned by no other form of government
than by democracy. Out of what I believe is the greatest possible excess of
freedom springs what is the hardest and most savage form of slavery.’ See also
Republic, 565c/d: ‘And are not the common people in the habit of making one
man their champion or party leader, and of exalting his position and making him
great?’—‘This is their habit.’—‘Then it seems clear that whenever a tyranny
grows up, this democratic party-leadership is the origin from which it springs.’
The so-called paradox of freedom is the argument that freedom in the sense
of absence of any restraining control must lead to very great restraint, since it
makes the bully free to enslave the meek. This idea is, in a slightly different
form, and with a very different tendency, clearly expressed by Plato.
Less well known is the paradox of tolerance: Unlimited tolerance must lead
to the disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those
who are intolerant, if we are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the
onslaught of the intolerant, then the tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance
with them.—In this formulation, I do not imply, for instance, that we should
always suppress the utterance of intolerant philosophies; as long as we can
counter them by rational argument and keep them in check by public opinion,
suppression would certainly be most unwise. But we should claim the right to
suppress them if necessary even by force; for it may easily turn out that they are
not prepared to meet us on the level of rational argument, but begin by
denouncing all argument; they may forbid their followers to listen to rational
argument, because it is deceptive, and teach them to answer arguments by the

use of their fists or pistols. We should therefore claim, in the name of tolerance,
the right not to tolerate the intolerant. We should claim that any movement
preaching intolerance places itself outside the law. and we should consider
incitement to intolerance and persecution as criminal, in the same way as we
should consider incitement to murder, or to kidnapping, or to the revival of the
slave trade, as criminal.
Another of the less well-known paradoxes is the paradox of democracy, or
more precisely, of majority-rule; i.e. the possibility that the majority may decide
that a tyrant should rule. That Plato’s criticism of democracy can be interpreted
in the way sketched here, and that the principle of majority-rule may lead to
self-contradictions, was first suggested, as far as I know, by Leonard Nelson (cp.
note 25 (2) to this chapter). I do not think, however, that Nelson, who, in spite of
his passionate humanitarianism and his ardent fight for freedom, adopted much
of Plato’s political theory, and especially Plato’s Principle of leadership, was
aware of the fact that analogous arguments can be raised against all the different
particular forms of the theory of sovereignty.
All these paradoxes can easily be avoided if we frame our political demands
the way suggested in section II of this chapter, or perhaps in some such as this.
We demand a government that rules according to the principles of
equalitarianism and protectionism; that tolerates all who are prepared to
reciprocate, i.e. who are tolerant; that is controlled by, and accountable to, the
public. And we may add that some form of majority vote, together with
institutions for keeping the public well informed, is the best, though not
infallible, means of controlling such a government. (No infallible means exist.)
Cp. also chapter 6, the last four paragraphs in the text prior to note 42; text to
note 20 to chapter 17; note 7 (4) to chapter 24; and note 6 to the present chapter.
5
Further remarks on this point will be found in chapter 19, below.
6
Cp. passage (7) in note 4 to chapter 2.
The following remarks on the paradoxes of freedom and of sovereignty may
possibly appear to carry the argument too far; since, however, the arguments
discussed in this place are of a somewhat formal character, it may be just as well
to make them more watertight, even if it involves something approaching hairsplitting. Moreover, my experience in debates of this kind leads me to expect
that the defenders of the leader-principle, i.e. of the sovereignty of the best or
the wisest, may actually offer the following counter-argument: (a) if ‘the wisest’
should decide that the majority should rule, then he was not really wise. As a
further consideration they may support this by the assertion (b) that a wise man
would never establish a principle which might lead to contradictions, like that of
majority-rule. My reply to (b) would be that we need only to alter this decision
of the ‘wise’ man in such a way that it becomes free from contradictions. (For
instance, he could decide in favour of a government bound to rule according to
the principle of equalitarianism and protectionism, and controlled by majority
vote. This decision of the wise man would give up the sovereignty-principle;
and since it would thereby become free from contradictions, it may be made by
a ‘wise’ man. But of course, this would not free the principle that the wisest
should rule from its contradictions. The other argument, namely (a), is a
different matter. It comes dangerously close to defining the ‘wisdom’ or
‘goodness’ of a politician in such a way that he is called ‘wise’ or ‘good’ only if
he is determined not to give up his power. And indeed, the only sovereigntytheory which is free from contradictions would be the theory which demands

that only a man who is absolutely determined to cling to his power should rule.
Those who believe in the leader-principle should frankly face this logical
consequence of their creed. If freed from contradictions it implies, not the rule
of the best or wisest, but the rule of the strong man, of the man of power. (Cp.
also note 7 to chapter 24.)
7
* Cp. my lecture Towards a Rational Theory of Tradition (first published
in The Rationalist Yearbook, 1949; now in my Conjectures and Refutations),
where I try to show that traditions play a kind of intermediate and intermediary
role between persons (and personal decisions’) and institutions.*
8
For Socrates’ behaviour under the Thirty, see Apology, 32c. The Thirty
tried to implicate Socrates in their crimes, but he resisted. This would have
meant death to him if the rule of the Thirty had continued a little longer. Cp. also
notes 53 and 56 to chapter 10.
For the contention, later in the paragraph, that wisdom means knowing the
limitations of one’s knowledge, see the Charmides, 167a, 170a, where the
meaning of ‘know thyself’ is explained in this way; the Apology (cp. especially
23a-b) exhibits a similar tendency (of which there is still an echo in the Timaeus,
723). For the important modification in the interpretation of ‘know thyself’
which takes place in the Philebus, see note 26 to the present chapter. (Cp. also
note 15 to chapter 8.)
9
Cp. Plato’s Phaedo, 96-99. The Phaedo is, I believe, still partly Socratic,
but very largely Platonic. The story of his philosophical development told by the
Socrates of the Phaedo has given rise to much discussion. It is, I believe, an
authentic autobiography neither of Socrates nor of Plato. I suggest that it is
simply Plato’s interpretation of Socrates’ development. Socrates’ attitude
towards science (an attitude which combined the keenest interest in rational
argument with a kind of modest agnosticism) was incomprehensible to Plato. He
tried to explain it by referring to the backwardness of Athenian science in
Socrates’ day, as opposed to Pythagoreanism. Plato thus presents this agnostic
attitude in such a way that it is no longer justified in the light of his newly
acquired Pythagoreanism. (And he tries to show how much the new
metaphysical theories of the soul would have appealed to Socrates’ burning
interest in the individual; cp. notes 44 and 56 to chapter 10, and note 58 to
chapter 8.)
10
It is the version that involves the square root of two, and the problem of
irrationality; i.e. it is the very problem that precipitated the dissolution of
Pythagoreanism. By refuting the Pythagorean arithmetization of geometry, it
gave rise to the specific deductive-geometrical methods which we know from
Euclid. (Cp. note g (2) to chapter 6.) The use of this problem in the Meno might
be connected with the fact that there is a tendency in some parts of this dialogue
to ‘show off’ the author’s (hardly Socrates’) acquaintance with the ‘latest’
philosophical developments and methods.
11
Gorgias, 521d, f.
12
Cp. Crossman, Plato To-Day, 118. ‘Faced by these three cardinal errors
of Athenian Democracy ..’—How truly Crossman understands Socrates may be
seen from op. cit., 93: ‘All that is good in our Western culture has sprung from
this spirit, whether it is found in scientists, or priests, or politicians, or quite
ordinary men and women who have refused to prefer political falsehoods to
simple truth .. in the end, their example is the only force which can break the

dictatorship of force and greed ... Socrates showed that philosophy is nothing
else than conscientious objection to prejudice and unreason.’
13
Cp. Crossman, op. cit., 117 f. (first group of italics mine). It seems that
Crossman has for the moment forgotten that, in Plato’s state, education is a class
monopoly. It is true that in the Republic the possession of money is not a key to
higher education. But this is quite unimportant. The important point is that only
the members of the ruling class are educated. (Cp. note 33 to chapter 4.)
Besides, Plato was, at least in his later life, anything but an opponent of
plutocracy, which he much preferred to a classless or equalitarian society: cp.
the passage from the Laws, 744b, ff., quoted in note 20 (1) to chapter 6. For the
problem of state control in education, cp. also note 42 to that chapter, and notes
39-41, chapter 4.
14
Burnet takes (Greek Philosophy, I, 178) the Republic to be purely
Socratic (or even pre-Socratic—a view which may be nearer to the truth; cp.
especially A. D. Winspear, The Genesis of Plato’s Thought, 1940). But he does
not even seriously attempt to reconcile this opinion with an important statement
which he quotes from Plato’s Seventh Letter (326a, cp. Greek Philosophy, I,
218) which he believes to be authentic. Cp. note 56 (5, d) to chapter 10.
15
Laws, 942c, quoted more fully in text to note 33, chapter 6.
16
Republic, 540c.
17
Cp. the quotations from the Republic, 473c-e, quoted in text to note 44,
chapter 8.
18
Republic, 498b/c. Cp. the Laws, 634d/c, in which Plato praises the Dorian
law that ‘forbids any young man to question which of the laws are right and
which are wrong, and makes them all unanimous in proclaiming that the laws
are all good’. Only an old man may criticize a law, adds the old writer; and even
he may do so only when no young man can hear him. See also text to note 21 to
this chapter, and notes 17, 23 and 40 to chapter 4.
19
Republic, 497d.
20
Op. cit., 537c. The next quotations are from 537d-e, and 539d. The
‘continuation of this passage’ is 540b-c. Another most interesting remark is
536c-d, where Plato says that the persons selected (in the previous passage) for
dialectical studies are decidedly too old for learning new subjects.
21
* Cp. H. Cherniss, The Riddle of the Early Academy, p. 79; and the
Parmenides, 135c-d.*
Grote, the great democrat, strongly comments on this point (i.e. on the
‘brighter’ passages of the Republic, 537c—540): ‘The dictum forbidding
dialectic debate with youth .. is decidedly anti-Socratic ... It belongs indeed to
the case of Meletus and Anytus, in their indictment against Socrates. It is
identical with their charge against him, of corrupting the youth ... And when we
find him (= Plato) forbidding all such discourse at an earlier age than thirty
years—we remark as a singular coincidence that this is the exact prohibition
which Critias and Charicles actually imposed upon Socrates himself, during the
short-lived dominion of the Thirty Oligarchs at Athens.’ (Grote, Plato, and the
Other Companions of Socrates, ed. 1875, vol. III, 239.)
22
The idea, contested in the text, that those who are good in obeying will
also be good in commanding is Platonic. Cp. Laws, 762c.
Toynbee has admirably shown how successfully a Platonic system of
educating rulers may work—in an arrested society; cp. A Study of History, III,
especially 33 ff.; cp. notes 32 (3) and 45 (2) to chapter 4.

23

Some may perhaps ask how an individualist can demand devotion to any
cause, and especially to such an abstract cause as scientific inquiry. But such a
question would only reveal the old mistake (discussed in the foregoing chapter),
the identification of individualism and egoism. An individualist can be unselfish,
and he can devote himself not only to the help of individuals, but also to the
development of the institutional means for helping other people. (Apart from
that, I do not think that devotion should be demanded, but only that it should be
encouraged.) I believe that devotion to certain institutions, for instance, to those
of a democratic state, and even to certain traditions, may fall well within the
realm of individualism, provided that the humanitarian aims of these institutions
are not lost sight of. Individualism must not be identified with an antiinstitutional personalism. This is a mistake frequently made by individualists.
They are right in their hostility to collectivism, but they mistake institutions for
collectives (which claim to be aims in themselves), and therefore become antiinstitutional personalists; which leads them dangerously close to the leaderprinciple. (I believe that this partly explains Dickens’ hostile attitude towards
Parliament.) For my terminology (‘individualism’ and ‘collectivism’) see text to
notes 26-29 to chapter 6.
24
Cp. Samuel Butler, Erewhon (1872), p. 135 of the Everyman’s edition.
25
Cp. for these events: Meyer, Gesch. d. Altertums, V, pp. 522-525, and
488 f.; see also note 69 to chapter 10. The Academy was notorious for breeding
tyrants. Among Plato’s pupils were Chairon, later the tyrant of Pellene; Eurastus
and Coriscus, the tyrants of Skepsis (near Atarneus); and Hermias, later tyrant of
Atarneus and Assos. (Cp. Athen., XI, 508, and Strabo, XIII, 610.) Hermias was,
according to some sources, a direct pupil of Plato’s; according to the so-called
‘Sixth Platonic Letter’, whose authenticity is questionable, he was perhaps only
an admirer of Plato’s, ready to accept his advice. Hermias became a patron of
Aristotle, and of the third head of the Academy, Plato’s pupil Xenocrates.
For Perdiccas III, and his relations to Plato’s pupil Euphacus, see Athen.,
XI, 508 ff., where Callippus is also referred to as Plato’s pupil.
(1) Plato’s lack of success as an educator is not very surprising if we look at
the principles of education and selection developed in the First Book of the
Laws (from 637d and especially 643a: ‘Let me define the nature and meaning of
education’ to the end of 650b). For in this long passage he shows that there is
one great instrument of educating, or rather, of selecting the man one can trust.
It is wine, drunkenness, which will loose his tongue, and give you an idea of
what he is really like. ‘What is more fitting than to make use of wine, first of all
to test the character of a man, and secondly, to train him? What is cheaper, and
less objectionable?’ (649d/e). So far, I have not seen the method of drinking
discussed by any of the educationists who glorify Plato. This is strange, for the
method is still widely in use, even though it is perhaps no longer so cheap,
especially in the universities.
(2) In fairness to the leader-principle, it must be admitted, however, that
others have been more fortunate than Plato in their selection. Leonard Nelson
(cp. note 4 to this chapter), for instance, who believed in this principle, seems to
have had a unique power both of attracting and of selecting a number of men
and women who have remained true to their cause, in the most trying and
tempting circumstances. But theirs was a better cause than Plato’s; it was the
humanitarian idea of freedom and equalitarian justice.

(Some of Nelson’s essays have just been published in an English
translation, by Yale University Press, under the title Socratic Method and
Critical Philosophy, 1949. The very interesting introductory essay is by Julius
Kraft.) *
(3) There remains this fundamental weakness in the theory of the
benevolent dictator, a theory still flourishing even among some democrats. I
have in mind the theory of the leading personality whose intentions are for the
best of his people and who can be trusted. Even if that theory were in order;
even if we believe that a man can continue, without being controlled or checked,
in such an attitude: how can we assume that he will detect a successor of the
same rare excellence? (Cp. also notes 3 and 4 to chapter 9, and note 69 to
chapter 10.)
(4) Concerning the problem of power, mentioned in the text, it is interesting
to compare the Gorgias (525e, f.) with the Republic (615d, f.). The two passages
are closely parallel. But the Gorgias insists that the greatest criminals are always
‘men who come from the class which possesses power’; private persons may be
bad, it is said, but not incurable. In the Republic, this clear warning against the
corrupting influence of power is omitted. Most of the greatest sinners are still
tyrants; but, it is said, ‘there are also some private people among them’. (In the
Republic, Plato relies on self-interest which, he trusts, will prevent the guardians
from misusing their power; cp. Rep., 466b/c, quoted in text to note 41, chapter 6.
It is not quite clear why self-interest should have such a beneficial effect on
guardians, but not on tyrants.)
26
* In the early (Socratic) dialogues (e.g. in the Apology and the
Charmides; cp. note 8 to the present chapter, note 15 to chapter 8 and note 56
(5) to chapter 10), the saying ‘know thyself is interpreted as ‘know how little
you know’. The late (Platonic) dialogue Philebus, however, introduces a subtle
but very important change. At first (48c/d, f.), the saying is here interpreted, by
implication, in the same way; for the many who do not know themselves are
said to be ‘claiming,.. and lying, that they are wise’. But this interpretation is
now developed as follows. Plato divides men into two classes, the weak and the
powerful. The ignorance and folly of the weak man is described as laughable,
while ‘the ignorance of the strong’ is ‘appropriately called “evil” and
“hateful”..’. But this implies the Platonic doctrine that he who wields power
ought to be wise rather than ignorant (or that only he who is wise ought to wield
power); in opposition to the original Socratic doctrine that (everybody, and
especially) he who wields power ought to be aware of his ignorance. (There is,
of course, no suggestion in the Philebus that ‘wisdom’ in its turn ought to be
interpreted as ‘awareness of one’s limitations’; on the contrary, wisdom involves
here an expert knowledge of Pythagorean teaching, and of the Platonic Theory
of Forms, as developed in the Sophist.)*

Notes To Chapter 8
With the motto for this chapter, taken from Republic 540c-d, cp. note 37 to
this chapter, and note 12 to chapter 9, where the passage is quoted more fully.
1
Republic, 475e; cp. for instance also 485c f., 501c.
2
Op. cit., 389b, f.
3
Op. cit., 389c/d; cp. also Laws, 790b, ff.

4

With this and the three following quotations, cp. Republic, 407e and 406c.
See also Statesman, 293a, f., 295b-296e, etc.
5
Cp. Laws, 720c. It is interesting to note that the passage (718c-722b)
serves to introduce the idea that the statesman should use persuasion, together
with force (722b); and since by ‘persuasion’ of the masses, Plato means largely
lying propaganda—cp. notes 9 and 10 to this chapter and the quotation from
Republic, 414b/c quoted there in the text—it turns out that Plato’s thought in our
passage from the Laws, in spite of this novel gentleness, is still pervaded by the
old associations—the doctor-politician administering lies. Later on (Laws,
857c/d), Plato complains about an opposite type of doctor: one who talks too
much philosophy to his patient, instead of concentrating on the cure. It seems
likely enough that Plato reports here some of his experiences when he fell ill
while writing the Laws.
6
Republic, 389b.—With the following short quotations cp. Republic, 459c.
7
Cp. Kant, On Eternal Peace, Appendix. (Werke, ed. Cassirer, 1914, vol.
VI, 457.) Cp. M. Campbell Smith’s translation (1903), pp. 162 ff.
8
Cp. Grossman, Plato To-Day (1937). 130; cp. also the immediately
preceding pages. It seems that Grossman still believes that lying propaganda was
intended only for the consumption of the ruled, and that Plato intended to
educate the rulers to a full use of their critical faculties; for I find now (in The
Listener, vol. 27, p. 750) that he writes: ‘Plato believed in free speech, free
discussion only for the select few.’ But the fact is that he did not believe in it at
all. Both in the Republic and in the Laws (cp. the passages quoted in notes 18-21
to chapter 7, and text), he expresses his fear lest anybody who is not yet on the
verge of old age should think or speak freely, and thus endanger the rigidity of
the arrested doctrine, and therefore the petrifaction of the arrested society. See
also the next two notes.
9
Republic, 414b/c. In 414d, Plato reaffirms his hope of persuading ‘the
rulers themselves and the military class, and then the rest of the city’, of the
truth of his lie. Later he seems to have regretted his frankness; for in the
Statesman, 269b. ff. (see especially 271b; cp. also note 6 (4) to chapter 3), he
speaks as if he believed in the truth of the same Myth of the Earthborn which, in
the Republic, he had been reluctant (see note 11 to this chapter) to introduce
even as a lordly ‘lie’.
* What I translate as a ‘lordly lie’ is usually translated ‘noble lie’ or ‘noble
falsehood’ or even ‘spirited fiction’. The literal translation of the word
‘gennaios’ which I now translate by ‘lordly’ is ‘high born’ or ‘of noble descent’.
Thus ‘lordly lie’ is at least as literal as ‘noble lie’, but it avoids the associations
which the term ‘noble lie’ might suggest, and which are in no way warranted by
the situation, viz. a lie by which a man nobly takes something upon himself
which endangers him—such as Tom Sawyer’s lie by which he takes Becky’s
guilt upon himself and which Judge Thatcher (in chapter XXXV) describes as ‘a
noble, a generous, a magnanimous lie’. There is no reason whatever why the
‘lordly lie’ should be considered in this light; thus the translation ‘noble lie’ is
just one of the typical attempts at idealizing Plato.—Cornford translates ‘a ..
bold flight of invention’, and argues in a footnote against the translation ‘noble
lie’; he gives passages where ‘gennaios’ means ‘on a generous scale’; and
indeed, ‘big lie’ or ‘grand lie’ would be a perfectly appropriate translation. But
Cornford at the same time argues against the use of the term ‘lie’; he describes
the myth as ‘Plato’s harmless allegory’ and argues against the idea that Plato

‘would countenance lies, for the most part ignoble, now called propaganda’; and
in the next footnote he says: ‘Note that the Guardians themselves are to accept
this allegory, if possible. It is not “propaganda” foisted on the masses by the
Rulers.’ But all these attempts at idealization fail. Plato himself makes it quite
clear that the lie is one for which one ought to feel ashamed; see the last
quotation in note 11, below. (In the first edition of this book, I translated
‘inspired lie’, alluding to its ‘high birth’, and suggested ‘ingenious lie’ as an
alternative; this was criticized both as too free and as tendentious by some of my
Platonic friends. But Cornford’s ‘bold flight of invention’ takes ‘gennaios’ in
precisely the same sense.)
See also notes 10 and 18 to this chapter.*
10
Cp. Republic, 519e, f., quoted in the text to note 35 to chapter 5; on
persuasion and force, see also Republic, 366d, discussed in the present note,
below, and the passages referred to in notes 5 and 18 to this chapter.
The Greek word (‘peithō’; its personification is an alluring goddess, an
attendant of Aphrodite) usually translated by persuasion can mean (a)
‘persuasion by fair means’ and (b) ‘talking over by foul means’, i.e. ‘makebelieve’ (see below, sub. (D), i.e. Rep., 414c), and sometimes it means even
‘persuasion by gifts’, i.e. bribery (see below, sub. (D), i.e. Rep., 390e).
Especially in the phrase ‘persuasion and force’, the term ‘persuasion’ is often
(Rep. 548e) interpreted in sense (a), and the phrase is often (and often
appropriately) translated ‘by fair means or foul’ (cp. Davies’ and Vaughan’s
translation ‘by fair means or foul’, of the passage (C), Rep., 365d, quoted
below). I believe, however, that Plato, when recommending ‘persuasion and
force’ as instruments of political technique, uses the words in a more literal
sense, and that he recommends the use of rhetorical propaganda together with
violence. (Cp. Laws, 661c, 711c, 722b, 753a.)
The following passages are significant for Plato’s use of the term
‘persuasion’ in sense (b), and especially in connection with political propaganda.
(A) Gorgias, 453a to 466a, especially 454b-455a; Phaedrus, 260b, ff.,
Theaetetus, 201a; Sophist, 222c; Statesman, 296b, ff., 304c/d; Philebus, 58a. In
all these passages, persuasion (the ‘art of persuasion’ as opposed to the ‘art of
imparting true knowledge’) is associated with rhetoric, make-believe, and
propaganda. In the Republic, 364b f., especially 364e-365d (cp. Laws, 909b),
deserves attention. (B) In 364e (‘they persuade’, i.e. mislead into believing, ‘not
only individuals, but whole cities’), the term is used much in the same sense as
in 414b/c (quoted in the text to note 9, this chapter), the passage of the ‘lordly
lie’. (C) 365d is interesting because it uses a term which Lindsay translates very
aptly by ‘cheating’ as a kind of paraphrase for ‘persuading’. (‘In order not to be
caught .. we have the masters of persuasion at our disposal;.. thus by persuasion
and force, we shall escape punishment. But, it may be objected, one cannot
cheat, or force, the gods ..’) Furthermore (D) in Republic, 390e, f., the term
‘persuasion’ is used in the sense of bribery. (This must be an old use; the
passage is supposed to be a quotation from Hesiod. It is interesting that Plato,
who so often argues against the idea that men can ‘persuade’ or bribe the gods,
makes some concession to it in the next passage, 399a/b.) Next we come to
414b/c, the Passage of the ‘lordly lie’; immediately after this passage, in 414c
(cp. also the next note in this chapter), ‘Socrates’ makes the cynical remark (E):
It would need much persuading to make anybody believe in this story.’ Lastly, I
may mention (F) Republic, 511d and 533e, where Plato speaks of persuasion or

belief or faith (the root of the Greek word for ‘persuasion’ is the same as that of
our ‘faith’) as a lower cognitive faculty of the soul, corresponding to the
formation of (delusive) opinion about things in flux (cp. note 21 to chapter 3,
and especially the use of ‘persuasion’ in Tim., 51e), as opposed to rational
knowledge of the unchanging Forms. For the problem of ‘moral’ persuasion, see
also chapter 6, especially notes 52/54 and text, and chapter 10, especially text to
notes 56 and 65, and note 69.
11
Republic, 415a. The next quotation is from 415c. (See also the Cratylus,
398a.) Cp. notes 12-14 to the present chapter and text, and notes 27 (3), 29, and
31 to chapter 4.
(1) For my remark in the text, earlier in this paragraph, concerning Plato’s
uneasiness, see Republic, 414c-d, and last note, (E): ‘It would need much
persuading to make anybody believe in this story,’ says Socrates.—‘You seem
to be rather reluctant to tell it,’ replies Glaucon.—‘You will understand my
reluctance’, says Socrates, ‘when I have told it.’—‘Speak and don’t be
frightened’, says Glaucon. This dialogue introduces what I call the first idea of
the Myth (proffered by Plato in the Statesman as a true story; cp. note 9 to this
chapter; see also Laws, 740a). As mentioned in the text, Plato suggests that it is
this ‘first idea’ which is the reason for his hesitation, for Glaucon replies to this
idea: ‘Not without reason were you so long ashamed to tell your lie.’ No similar
rhetorical remark is made after Socrates has told ‘the rest of the story’, i.e., the
Myth of Racialism.
* (2) Concerning the autochthonous warriors, we must remember that the
Athenian nobility claimed (as opposed to the Dorians) to be the aborigines of
their country, born of the earth ‘like grasshoppers’ (as Plato says in the
Symposium, 191b; see also end of note 52 to the present chapter). It has been
suggested to me by a friendly critic that Socrates’ uneasiness, and Glaucon’s
comment that Socrates had reason to be ashamed, mentioned here-under (1), is
to be interpreted as an ironical allusion of Plato’s to the Athenians who, in spite
of their claim to be autochthonous, did not defend their country as they would
defend a mother. But this ingenious suggestion does not appear to me a tenable
one. Plato, with his openly admitted preference of Sparta, would be the last to
charge the Athenians with lack of patriotism; and there would be no justice in
such a charge, for in the Peloponnesian war, the Athenian democrats never gave
in to Sparta (as will be shown in chapter to), while Plato’s own beloved uncle
Critias did give in, and became the leader of a puppet government under the
protection of the Spartans. If Plato intended to allude ironically to an inadequate
defence of Athens, then it could be only an allusion to the Peloponnesian war,
and thus a criticism of Critias—the last person whom Plato would criticize in
this way.
(3) Plato calls his Myth a ‘Phoenician lie’. A suggestion which may explain
this is due to R. Eisler. He points out that the Ethiopians, Greeks (the silver
mines), Sudanese, and Syrians (Damascus) were in the Orient described,
respectively, as golden, silver, bronze, and iron races, and that this description
was utilized in Egypt for purposes of political propaganda (cp. also Daniel, ii.
31-45); and he suggests that the story of these (our races was brought to Greece
in Hesiod’s time by the Phoenicians (as might be expected;, and that Plato
alludes to this fact.*

12

The passage is from the Republic, 546a, ff.; cp. text to notes 36-40 to
chapter 5. The intermixture of classes is clearly forbidden in 434c also; cp. notes
27 (3), 31 and 34 to chapter 4, and note 40 to chapter 6.
The passage from the Laws (930d-e) contains the principle that the child of
a mixed marriage inherits the caste of his lesser parent.
13
Republic, 547a. (For the mixture theory of heredity, see also text to note
39/40 to chapter 5, especially 40 (2), and to notes 39-43, and 52, to the present
chapter.)
14
Op. cit., 415c.
15
Cp. Adam’s note to Republic, 414b, ff., italics mine. The great exception
is Grote (Plato, and the Other Companions of Socrates, London, 1875, III, 240),
who sums up the spirit of the Republic, and its opposition to that of the Apology:
‘In the .. Apology, we find Socrates confessing his own ignorance ... But the
Republic presents him in a new character ... He is himself on the throne of King
Nomos: the infallible authority, temporal as well as spiritual, from which all
public sentiment emanates, and by whom orthodoxy is determined ... He now
expects every individual to fall into the place, and contract the opinions,
prescribed by authority; including among these opinions deliberate ethical and
political fictions, such as about the .. earthborn men ... Neither the Socrates of
the Apology, nor his negative Dialectic, could be allowed to exist in the Platonic
Republic.’ (Italics mine; see also Grote, op. cit., p. 188.)
The doctrine that religion is opium for the people, although not in this
particular formulation, turns out to be one of the tenets of Plato and the
Platonists. (Cp. also note 17 and text, and especially note 18 to this chapter.) It
is, apparently, one of the more esoteric doctrines of the school, i.e. it may be
discussed only by sufficiently elderly members (cp. note 18 to chapter 7) of the
upper class. But those who let the cat out of the bag are prosecuted for atheism
by the idealists.
16
For instance Adam, Barker, Field.
17
Cp. Diels, Vorsokratiker5, Critias fragm. 25. (I have picked about eleven
characteristic lines out of more than forty.)—It may be remarked that the
passage commences with a sketch of the social contract (which even somewhat
resembles Lycophron’s equalitarianism; cp. note 45 to chapter 6). On Critias, cp.
especially note 48 to chapter 10. Since Burnet has suggested that the poetic and
dramatic fragments known under the name of Critias should be attributed to the
grandfather of the leader of the Thirty, it should be noted that Plato attributes to
the latter poetic gifts in the Charmides, 157e; and in 162d, he alludes even to the
fact that Critias was a dramatist. (Cp. also Xenophon’s Memorabilia, I, iv, 18.)
18
Cp. the Laws, 909e. It seems that Critias’ view later even became part of
the Platonic school tradition, as indicated by the following passage from
Aristotle’s Metaphysics (1074b3) which at the same time provides another
example of the use of the term ‘persuasion’ for ‘propaganda’ (cp. notes 5 and 10
to this chapter). ‘The rest .. has been added in the form of a myth, with a view to
the persuasion of the mob, and to legal and general (political) expediency ..’ Cp.
also Plato’s attempt in the Statesman, 271a, f., to argue in favour of the truth of a
myth in which he certainly did not believe. (See notes 9 and 15 to this chapter.)
19
Laws, 908b.
20
Op. cit., 909a.
21
For the conflict between good and evil, see op. cit., 904-906. See
especially 906a/b (justice versus injustice; ‘justice’ means here, still, the

collectivist justice of the Republic). Immediately preceding is 903c, a passage
quoted above in the text to note 35 to chapter 5 and to note 27 to chapter 6. See
also note 32 to the present chapter.
22
Op. cit., 905d-907b.
23
The paragraph to which this note is appended indicates my adherence to
an ‘absolutist’ theory of truth which is in accordance with the common idea that
a statement is true if (and only if) it agrees with the facts it describes. This
‘absolute’ or ‘correspondence theory of truth’ (which goes back to Aristotle)
was first clearly developed by A. Tarski (Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den
formalisierten Sprachen, Polish ed. 1933, German translation1936), and is the
basis of a theory of logic called by him Semantics (cp. note 29 to chapter 3 and
note 5 (2) to chapter 5); see also R. Carnap’s Introduction to Semantics, 1942,
which develops the theory of truth in detail. I am quoting from p. 28: ‘It is
especially to be noticed that the concept of truth in the sense just explained—we
may call it the semantical concept of truth—is fundamentally different from
concepts like “believed”, “verified”, “highly confirmed”, etc.’—A similar,
though undeveloped view can be found in my Logik der Forschung, (translated.
1959, as The Logic of Scientific Discovery), section 84; this was written before I
became acquainted with Tarski’s Semantics, which is the reason why my theory
is only rudimentary. The pragmatist theory of truth (which derives from
Hegelianism) was criticized by Bertrand Russell from the point of view of an
absolutist theory of truth as early as 1907; and recently he has shown the
connection between a relativist theory of truth and the creed of fascism. See
Russell, Let the People Think, pp. 77. 79.
24
Especially Rep., 474c-502d. The following quotation is Rep., 475e.
25
For the seven quotations which follow, in this paragraph, see: (1) and (2),
Republic, 476b; (3), (4), (5), op. cit., 500d-e; (6) and (7): op. cit., 501a/b; with
(7), cp. also the parallel passage, op. cit., 484c. See, furthermore, Sophist,
253d/e; Laws, 964a-966a (esp. 965b/c).
26
Cp. op. cit., 501c.
27
Cp. especially Republic, 509a, f.—See 509b: ‘The sun induces the
sensible things to generate’ (although he is not himself involved in the process
of generation); similarly, ‘you may say of the objects of rational knowledge that
not only do they owe it to the Good that they can be known, but their reality and
even their essence flows from it; although the Good is not itself an essence but
transcends even essences in dignity and power.’ (With 509b, cp. Aristotle, De
Gen. et Con., 336a 15, 31, and Phys., 194b 13.)—In 510b, the Good is described
as the absolute origin (not merely postulated or assumed), and in 511b, it is
described as ‘the first origin of everything’.
28
Cp. especially Republic, 508b, ff.—See 508b/c: ‘What the Good has
begotten in its own likeness’ (viz. truth) ‘is the link, in the intelligible world
between reason and its objects’ (i.e. the Ideas) ‘in the same way as, in the visible
world, that thing’ (viz. light which is the offspring of the sun) ‘which is the link
between sight and its objects’ (i.e. sensible things).
29
Cp. op. cit., 505a; 534b, ff.
30
Cp. op. cit., 505d.
31
Philebus, 66a.
32
Republic, 506d, ff., and 509-511.
The definition of the Good, here quoted, as ‘the class of the determinate (or
finite, or limited) conceived as a unity’ is, I believe, not so hard to understand,

and is in full agreement with others of Plato’s remarks. The ‘class of the
determinate’ is the class of the Forms or Ideas, conceived as male principles, or
progenitors, as opposed to the female, unlimited or indeterminate space (cp. note
15 (2) to chapter 3). These Forms or primogenitors are, of course, good, in so far
as they are ancient and unchanging originals, and in so far as each of them is one
as opposed to the many sensible things which it generates. If we conceive the
class or race of the progenitors as many, then they are not absolutely good; thus
the absolute Good can be visualized if we conceive them as a unity, as One—as
the One primogenitor. (Cp. also Arist., Met., 088a 10.)
Plato’s Idea of the Good is practically empty. It gives us no indication of
what is good, in a moral sense, i.e. what we ought to do. As can be seen
especially from notes 27 and 28 to this chapter, all we hear is that the Good is
highest in the realm of Form or Ideas, a kind of super-Idea, from which the Ideas
originate, and receive their existence. All we could possibly derive from this is
that the Good is unchangeable and prior or primary and therefore ancient (cp.
note 3 to chapter 4), and One Whole; and, therefore, that those things participate
in it which do not change, i.e., the good is what preserves (cp. notes 2 and 3 to
chapter 4), and what is ancient, especially the ancient laws (cp. note 23 to
chapter 4, note 7, paragraph on Platonism, to chapter 5, and note 18 to chapter
7), and that holism is good (cp. note 21 to the present chapter); i.e., we are again
thrown back, in practice, to totalitarian morality (cp. text to notes 40/41 to
chapter 6).
If the Seventh Letter is genuine, then we have there (314b/c) another
statement by Plato that his doctrine of the Good cannot be formulated; for he
says of this doctrine: ‘It is not capable of expression like other branches of
study.’ (Cp. also note 57 to chapter 10.)
It is again Grote who clearly saw and criticized the emptiness of the
Platonic Idea or Form of Good. After asking what this Good is, he says (Plato,
III, 241 f.): ‘This question is put .. But unfortunately it remains unanswered ... In
describing the condition of other men’s minds—that they divine a Real Good ..
do everything in order to obtain it, but puzzle themselves in vain to grasp and
determine what it is—he’ (Plato) ‘has unconsciously described the condition of
his own.’ It is surprising to see how few modern writers have taken any notice of
Grote’s excellent criticism of Plato.
For the quotations in the next paragraph of the text, see (1): Republic, 500bc; (2): op. cit., 485a/b. This second passage is very interesting. It is, as Adam
reaffirms (note to 485b9),the first passage in which ‘generation’ and
‘degeneration’ are employed in this half-technical sense. It refers to the flux, and
to Parmenides’ changeless entities. And it introduces the main argument in
favour of the rule of the philosophers. See also note 26 (1) to chapter 3 and note
2 (2) to chapter 4. In the Laws, 689c-d, when discussing the ‘degeneration’
(688c) of the Dorian kingdom brought about by the ‘worst ignorance’ (the
ignorance, namely, of not knowing how to obey those who are rulers by nature;
see 689b), Plato explains what he means by wisdom: only such wisdom as aims
at the greatest unity or ‘unisonity’ entitles a man to authority. And the term
‘unisonity’ is explained in the Republic, 591b and d, as the harmony of the ideas
of justice (i.e. of keeping one’s place) and of temperance (of being satisfied with
it). Thus we are again thrown back to our starting point.
33
* A critic of this passage asserted that he could find no trace, in Plato, of
any fear of independent thought. But we should remember Plato’s insistence on

censorship (see notes 40 and 41 to chapter 4) and his prohibition of higher
dialectical studies for anybody under 50 years of age in the Republic (see notes
19 to 21 to chapter 7), to say nothing of the Laws (see note 18 to chapter 7, and
many other passages).*
34
For the problem of the priest caste, see the Timaeus, 24a. In a passage
which clearly alludes to the best or ‘ancient’ state of the Republic, the priest
caste takes the place of the ‘philosophic race’ of the Republic. Cp. also the
attacks on priests (and even on Egyptian priests), diviners, and shamans, in the
Statesman, 290c, f.; see also note 57 (2) to chapter 8, and note 29 to chapter 4.
The remark of Adam’s, quoted in the text in the paragraph after the next, is
from his note to Republic, 547a3 (quoted above in text to note 43 to chapter 5).
35
Cp. for instance Republic, 484c, 500e, ff.
36
Republic, 535a/b. All that Adam says (cp. his note to 535b8) about the
term which I have translated by ‘awe-inspiring’ supports the usual view that the
term means ‘stern’ or ‘awful’, especially in the sense of ‘inspiring terror’.
Adam’s suggestion that we translate ‘masculine’ or ‘virile’ follows the general
tendency to tone down what Plato says, and it clashes strangely with Theaetetus
149a. Lindsay translates: ‘of .. sturdy morals’.
37
Op. cit., 540c; see also 500c-d: ‘the philosopher himself .. becomes
godlike’, and note 12 to chapter g, where 540c, f., is quoted more fully.—It is
most interesting to note how Plato transforms the Parmenidian One when
arguing in favour of an aristocratic hierarchy. The opposition one—many is not
preserved, but gives rise to a system of grades: the one Idea—the few who come
close to it—the more who are their helpers—the many, i.e. the mob (this
division is fundamental in the Statesman). As opposed to this, Antisthenes’
monotheism preserves the original Eleatic opposition between the One (God)
and the Many (whom he probable considered as brothers because of their equal
distance from God).—Antisthenes was influenced by Parmenides through
Zeno’s influence upon Gorgias. Probably there was also the influence of
Democritus, who had taught: ‘The wise may belongs to all countries alike, for
the home of a great soul is the whole world.’
38
Republic, 500d.
39
The quotations are from Republic, 459b, and ff.; cp. also notes 34 f. to
chapter 4, and especially 40 (2) to chapter 5. Cp. also the three similes of the
Statesman, where the ruler is compared with (1) the shepherd, (2) the doctor, (3)
the weaver whose functions are explained as those of a man who blends
characters by skilful breeding (310b, f.).
40
Op. cit., 460a. My statement that Plato considers this law very important
is based on the fact that Plato mentions it in the outline of the Republic in the
Timaeus, 18d/e.
41
Op. cit., 460b. The ‘suggestion is taken up’ in 468c; see the next note.
42
Op. cit., 468c. Though it has been denied by my critics, my translation is
correct, and so is my remark about ‘the latter benefit’. Shorey calls the passage
‘deplorable’.
43
For the Story of the Number and the Fall, cp. notes 13 and 52 to this
chapter, notes 39/40 to chapter 5, and text.
44
Republic, 473c-e. Note the opposition between (divine) rest, and the evil,
i.e. change in the form of corruption, or degeneration. Concerning the term
translated here by ‘oligarchs’ cp. the end of note 57, below. It is equivalent to
‘hereditary aristocrats’.

The phrase which, for stylistic reasons, I have put in brackets, is important,
for in it Plato demands the suppression of all ‘pure’ philosophers (and
unphilosophical politicians). A more literal translation of the phrase would be
this: ‘while the many’ (who have) ‘natures’ (disposed or gifted) ‘for drifting
along, nowadays, in one alone of these two, are eliminated by force’. Adam
admits that the meaning of Plato’s phrase is ‘that Plato refuses to sanction the
exclusive pursuit of knowledge’; but his suggestion that we soften the meaning
of the last words of the phrase by translating: ‘are forcibly debarred from
exclusively pursuing either’ (italics his; cp. note to 473d24,vol. I, 330, of his ed.
of the Republic) has no foundation in the original,—only in his tendency to
idealize Plato. The same holds for Lindsay’s translation (‘are forcibly debarred
from this behaviour’).—Whom does Plato wish to suppress? I believe that ‘the
many’ whose limited or incomplete talents or ‘natures’ Plato condemns here are
identical (as far as philosophers are concerned) with the ‘many whose natures
are incomplete’, mentioned in Republic, 495d; and also with the ‘many’
(professed philosophers)’ whose wickedness is inevitable’, mentioned in 489e
(cp. also 490e/491a); cp. notes 47, 56, and 59 to this chapter (and note 23 to
chapter 5). The attack is, therefore, directed on the one hand against the
‘uneducated’ democratic politicians, on the other hand most probably mainly
against the half-Thracian Antisthenes, the ‘uneducated bastard’, the equalitarian
philosopher; cp. note 47, below.
45
Kant, On Eternal Peace, Second Supplement (Werke, ed. Cassirer, 1914,
vol. VI, 456). Italics mine; I have also abbreviated the passage. (The ‘possession
of power’ may well allude to Frederick the Great.)
46
Cp. for instance Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, V, 12, 2 (German ed., vol. II2,
382); or Lindsay’s translation of the Republic. (For a criticism of this
interpretation, cp. note 50, below.)
47
It must be admitted that Plato’s attitude towards Antisthenes raises a
highly speculative problem; this is of course connected with the fact that very
little is known about Antisthenes from first-rate sources. Even the old Stoic
tradition that the Cynic school or movement can be traced back to Antisthenes is
at present often questioned (cp., for instance, G. C. Field’s Plato, 1930, or D. R.
Dudley, A History of Cynicism, 1937) although perhaps not on quite sufficient
grounds (cp. Fritz’s review of the last-mentioned book in Mind, vol. 47, p. 390).
In view of what we know, especially from Aristotle, about Antisthenes, it
appears to me highly probable that there are many allusions to him in Plato’s
writings; and even the one fact that Antisthenes was, apart from Plato, the only
member of Socrates’ inner circle who taught philosophy at Athens, would be a
sufficient justification for searching Plato’s work for such allusions. Now it
seems to me rather probable that a series of attacks in Plato’s work first pointed
out by Dümmler (especially Rep., 495d/e, mentioned below in note 56 to this
chapter; Rep., 535e, f., Soph., 251b-e) represents these allusions. There is a
definite resemblance (or so at least it appears to me) between these passages and
Aristotle’s scornful attacks on Antisthenes. Aristotle, who mentions
Antisthenes’ name, speaks of him as of a simpleton, and he speaks of
‘uneducated people such as the Antistheneans’ (cp. note 54 to chapter 11). Plato,
in the passages mentioned, speaks in a similar way, but more sharply. The first
passage I have in mind is from the Sophist, 251b, f., which corresponds very
closely indeed to Aristotle’s first passage. Regarding the two passages from the
Republic, we must remember that, according to the tradition, Antisthenes was a

‘bastard’ (his mother came from barbarian Thrace), and that he taught in the
Athenian gymnasium reserved for ‘bastards’. Now we find, in Republic, 535e, f.
(cp. end of note 52 to this chapter), an attack which is so specific that an
individual person must be intended. Plato speaks of ‘people who dabble in
philosophy without being restrained by a feeling of their own unworthiness’, and
he contends that ‘the baseborn should be debarred’ from doing so. He speaks of
the people as ‘unbalanced’ (or ‘skew’ or ‘limping’) in their love of work and of
relaxation; and becoming more personal, he alludes to somebody with a
‘crippled soul’ who, though he loves truth (as a Socratic would), does not attain
it, since he ‘wallows in ignorance’ (probably because he does not accept the
theory of Forms); and he warns the city not to trust such limping ‘bastards’. I
think it likely that Antisthenes is the object of this undoubtedly personal attack;
the admission that the enemy loves truth seems to me an especially strong
argument, occurring as it does in an attack of extreme violence. But if this
passage refers to Antisthenes, then it is very likely that a very similar passage
refers to him also, viz. Republic, 495d/e, where Plato again describes his victim
as possessing a disfigured or crippled soul as well as body. He insists in this
passage that the object of his contempt, in spite of aspiring to be a philosopher,
is so depraved that he is not even ashamed of doing degrading (‘banausic’; cp.
note 4 to chapter 11) manual labour. Now we know of Antisthenes that he
recommended manual labour, which he held in high esteem (for Socrates’
attitude, cp. Xenophon, Mem., II, 7, 10), and that he practised what he taught; a
further strong argument that the man with the crippled soul is Antisthenes.
Now in the same passage, Republic, 495d, there is also a remark about ‘the
many whose natures are incomplete’, and who nevertheless aspire to philosophy.
This seems to refer to the same group (the ‘Antistheneans’ of Aristotle) of
‘many natures’ whose suppression is demanded in Republic, 473c-e, discussed
in note 44 to this chapter.—Cp. also Republic, 489e, mentioned in notes 59 and
56 to this chapter.
48
We know (from Cicero, De Natura Deorum, and Philodemus, De Pietate)
that Antisthenes was a monotheist; and the form in which he expressed his
monotheism (there is only One God ‘according to nature’, i.e., to truth, although
there are many ‘according to convention’) shows that he had in mind the
opposition nature—convention which, in the mind of a former member of the
school of Gorgias and contemporary of Alcidamas and Lycophron (cp. note 13
to chapter 5), must have been connected with equalitarianism. This in itself does
not of course establish the conclusion that the half-barbarian Antisthenes
believed in the brotherhood of Greeks and barbarians. Yet it seems to me
extremely likely that he did.
W. W. Tarn (Alexander the Great and the Unity of Mankind; cp. note 13 (2)
to chapter 5) has tried to show—I once thought successfully—that the idea of
the unity of mankind can be traced back at least to Alexander the Great. I think
that by a very similar line of reasoning, we can trace it back farther; to
Diogenes, Antisthenes, and even to Socrates and the ‘Great Generation’ of the
Periclean age (cp. note 27 to chapter 10, and text). This seems, even without
considering the more detailed evidence, likely enough; for a cosmopolitan idea
can be expected to occur as a corollary of such imperialist tendencies as those of
the Periclean age (cp. Rep., 494c/d, mentioned in note 50 (5) to this chapter, and
the First Alcibiades, 105b, ff.; see also text to notes 9-22, 36 and 47 to chapter
10). This is especially likely if other equalitarian tendencies exist. I do not

intend to belittle the significance of Alexander’s deeds, but the ideas ascribed to
him by Tarn seem to me, in a way, a renaissance of some of the best ideas of
fifth-century Athenian imperialism. See also Addendum III, below, pp. 329 f.
Proceeding to details, I may first say that there is strong evidence that at least in
Plato’s (and Aristotle’s) time, the problem of equalitarianism was clearly seen to
be concerned with two fully analogous distinctions, that between Greeks and
barbarians on the one side and that between masters (or free men) and slaves on
the other; cp. with this note 13 to chapter 5. Now we have very strong evidence
that the fifth-century Athenian movement against slavery was not confined to a
few intellectualists like Euripides, Alcidamas, Lycophron, Antiphon, Hippias,
etc., but that it had considerable practical success. This evidence is contained in
the unanimous reports of the enemies of Athenian democracy (especially the
‘Old Oligarch’, Plato, Aristotle; cp. notes 17, 18 and 29 to chapter 4, and 36 to
chapter 10).
If we now consider in this light the admittedly scanty available evidence for
the existence of cosmopolitism, it appears, I believe, reasonably strong—
provided that we include the attacks of the enemies of this movement among the
evidence. In other words, we must make full use of the attacks of the Old
Oligarch, of Plato, and of Aristotle against the humanitarian movement, if we
wish to assess its real significance. Thus the Old Oligarch (2, 7) attacks Athens
for an eclectic cosmopolitan way of life. Plato’s attacks on cosmopolitan and
similar tendencies, although not frequent, are especially valuable. (I have in
mind passages like Rep., 562e/563a—’citizens, resident aliens, and strangers
from abroad, are all on a footing of equality’—a passage which should be
compared with the ironical description in Menexenus, 245c-d, in which Plato
sarcastically eulogizes Athens for its consistent hatred of barbarians; Rep.,
494c/d; of course, the passage Rep., 469b-471c, must be considered in this
context too. See also end of note 19 to chapter 6.) Whether or not Tarn is right
on Alexander, he hardly does full justice to the various extant statements of this
fifth-century movement, for instance to Antiphon (cp. p. 149, note 6 of his
paper) or Euripides or Hippias, or Democritus (cp. note 29 to chapter 10). or to
Diogenes (p. 150, note 12) and Antisthenes. I do not think that Antiphon wanted
only to stress the biological kinship between men, for he was undoubtedly a
social reformer; and ‘by nature’ meant to him ‘in truth’. It therefore seems to me
practically certain that he attacked the distinction between Greeks and
barbarians as being fictitious. Tarn comments on Euripides’ fragment which
states that a noble man can range the world like an eagle the air by remarking
that ‘he knew that an eagle has a permanent home-rock’; but this remark does
not do full justice to the fragment; for in order to be a cosmopolitan, one need
not give up one’s permanent home. In the light of all this, I do not see why
Diogenes’ meaning was purely ‘negative’ when he replied to the question
‘where are you from?’ by saying that he was a cosmopolite, a citizen of the
whole world; especially if we consider that a similar answer (‘I am a man of the
world’) is reported of Socrates, and another (‘The wise man belongs to all
countries, for the home of a great soul is the whole world’; cp. Diels5, fr. 247;
genuineness questioned by Tarn and Diels) of Democritus.
Antisthenes’ monotheism also must be considered in the light of this
evidence. There is no doubt that this monotheism was not of the Jewish, i.e.
tribal and exclusive, type. (Should the story of Diog. Laert., VI, 13, that
Antisthenes taught in the Cynosarges, the gymnasium for ‘bastards’, be true,

then he must have deliberately emphasized his own mixed and barbarian
descent.) Tarn is certainly right when he points out (p. 145) that Alexander’s
monotheism was connected with his idea of the unity of mankind. But the same
should be said of the Cynic ideas, which were influenced, as I believe (see the
last note), by Antisthenes, and in this way by Socrates. (Cp. especially the
evidence of Cicero, Tuscul, V., 37, and of Epictetus, I, 9, 1, with D.L., VI, 2, 6371; also Gorgias, 492e, with D.L., VI, 105. See also Epictetus, III, 22 and 24.)
All this made it once appear to me not too unlikely that Alexander may
have been genuinely inspired, as the tradition reports, by Diogenes’ ideas; and
thus by the equalitarian tradition. But in view of E. Badian’s criticism of Tarn
(Historia, 7, 1958, pp. 425 ff.) I feel now inclined to reject Tarn’s claim; but not,
of course, my views on the fifth-century movement.
49
Cp. Republic, 469b-471c, especially 470b-d, and 469b/c. Here indeed we
have (cp. the next note) a trace of something like the introduction of a new
ethical whole, more embracing than the city; namely the unity of Hellenic
superiority. As was to be expected (see the next note (1) (b)), Plato elaborates
the point in some detail. * (Cornford justly summarizes this passage when he
says that Plato ‘expresses no humanitarian sympathies extending beyond the
borders of Hellas’; cp. The Republic of Plato, 1941, p. 165.)*
50
In this note, further arguments are collected bearing on the interpretation
of Republic, 473e, and the problem of Plato’s humanitarianism. I wish to
express my thanks to my colleague, Prof. H. D. Broadhead, whose criticism has
greatly helped me to complete and clarify my argument.
(1) One of Plato’s standard topics (cp. the methodological remarks, Rep.,
368e, 445c, 577c, and note 32 to chapter 5) is the opposition and comparison
between the individual and the whole, i.e. the city. The introduction of a new
whole, even more comprehensive than the city, viz. mankind, would be a most
important step for a holist to take; it would need (a) preparation and (b)
elaboration, (a) Instead of such a preparation we get the above mentioned
passage on the opposition between Greeks and barbarians (Rep., 469b—471c).
(b) Instead of an elaboration, we find, if anything, a withdrawal of the
ambiguous expression ‘race of men’. First, in the immediate continuation of the
key-passage under consideration, i.e. of the passage of the philosopher king
(Republic, 473d/e), there occurs a paraphrase of the questionable expression, in
form of a summary or winding up of the whole speech; and this paraphrase,
Plato’s standard opposition, city—individual, replaces that of city—human race.
The paraphrase reads: ‘No other constitution can establish a state of happiness,
neither in private affairs nor in those of the city.’ Secondly, a similar result is
found if we analyse the six repetitions or variations (viz. 487e, 499b, 500e, 501c,
536a-b, discussed in note 52 below, and the summary 540d/e with the
afterthought 541b) of the key-passage under consideration (i.e. of Rep., 473d/e).
In two of them (487e, 500e) the city alone is mentioned; in all the others, Plato’s
standard opposition city—individual again replaces that of city—human race.
Nowhere is there a further allusion to the allegedly Platonic idea that sophocracy
alone can save, not only the suffering cities, but all suffering mankind.—In view
of all this it seems clear that in all these places only his standard opposition
lingered in Plato’s mind (without, however, the wish to give it any prominence
in this connection), probably in the sense that sophocracy alone can attain the
stability and the happiness—the divine rest—of any state, as well as that of all

its individual citizens and their progeny (in which otherwise evil must grow—
the evil of degeneration).
(2) The term ‘human’ (‘anthropinos’) is used by Plato, as a rule, either in
opposition to ‘divine’ (and, accordingly, sometimes in a slightly disparaging
sense, especially if the limitations of human knowledge or human art are to be
stressed, cp. Timaeus, 29c/d; 773, or Sophist, 266c, 268d, or Laws, 691e, f.,
854a), or in a zoological sense, in opposition, or with reference to, animals, for
example, eagles. Nowhere except in the early Socratic dialogues (for one further
exception, see this note under (6), below) do I find this term (or the term ‘man’)
used in a humanitarian sense, i.e. indicating something that transcends the
distinction of nation, race, or class. Even a ‘mental’ use of the term ‘human’ is
rare. (I have in mind a use such as in Laws, 737b: ‘a humanly impossible piece
of folly’.) In fact, the extreme nationalist views of Fichte and Spengler, quoted
in chapter 12, text to note 79, are a pointed expression of the Platonic usage of
the term ‘human’, as signifying a zoological rather than a moral category. A
number of Platonic passages indicating this and similar usages may be given:
Republic, 365d; 486a; 459b/c; 514b; 522c; 606e, f. (where Homer as a guide to
human affairs is opposed to the composer of hymns to the gods); 620b.—
Phaedo, 82b.—Cratylus, 392b.—Parmenides, 134e.—Theaetetus, 107b.—
Crito, 46e.—Protagoras, 344c.—Statesman, 274e. (the shepherd of the human
flock who is a god, not a man).—Laws, 673d; 688d; 737b (890b is perhaps
another example of a disparaging use—’the men’ seems here nearly equivalent
with ‘the many’).
(3) It is of course true that Plato assumes a Form or Idea of Man; but it is a
mistake to think that it represents what all men have in common; rather, it is an
aristocratic ideal of a proud super-Greek; and on this is based a belief, not in the
brotherhood of men, but in a hierarchy of ‘natures’, aristocratic or slavish, in
accordance with their greater or lesser likeness to the original, the ancient
primogenitor of the human race. (The Greeks are more like him than any other
race.) Thus ‘intelligence is shared by the gods with only a very few men’ (Tim.,
51e; cp. Aristotle, in the text to note 3, chapter 11).
(4) The ‘City in Heaven’ (Rep., 592b) and its citizens are, as Adam rightly
points out, not Greek; but this does not imply that they belong to ‘humanity’ as
he thinks (note to 470e30, and others); they are rather super-exclusive, superGreek (they are ‘above’ the Greek city of 470e, ff.)—more remote from the
barbarians than ever. (This remark does not imply that the idea of the City in
Heaven—as those of the Lion in Heaven, for example, and of other
constellations—may not have been of oriental origin.)
(5) Finally, it may be mentioned that the passage 499c/d rescinds the
distinction between Greeks and barbarians no more than that between the past,
the present, and the future: Plato tries here to give drastic expression to a
sweeping generalization in regard to time and space; he wishes to say no more
than: ‘If at any time whatever, or if at any place whatever’ (we may add: even in
such an extremely unlikely place as a barbarian country) ‘such a thing did
happen, then ...’ The remark. Republic. 404c/d, expresses a similar, though
stronger, feeling of being faced with something approaching impious absurdity,
a feeling here aroused by Alcibiades’ hopes for a universal empire of Greeks
and foreigners. (I agree with the views expressed by Field, Plato and His
Contemporaries, 130, note 1, and by Tarn; cp. note 13 (2) to chapter 5.)

To sum up, I am unable to find anything but hostility towards the
humanitarian idea of a unity of mankind which transcends race and class, and I
believe that those who find the opposite idealize Plato (cp. note 3 to chapter 6,
and text) and fail to see the link between his aristocratic and anti-humanitarian
exclusiveness and his theory of Ideas. See also this chapter, notes 51, 52, and 57,
below.
* (6) There is, to my knowledge, only one real exception, one passage
which stands in flagrant contrast to all this. In a passage (Theaetetus, 174e, f.),
designed to illustrate the broad-mindedness and the universalistic outlook of the
philosopher, we read: ‘Every man has had countless ancestors, and among them
are in any case rich and poor, kings and slaves, barbarians and Greeks.’ I do not
know how to reconcile this interesting and definitely humanitarian passage—its
emphasis on the parallelism master v. slave and Greek v. barbarian is
reminiscent of all those theories which Plato opposes—with Plato’s other views.
Perhaps it is, like so much in the Gorgias, Socratic; and the Theaetetus is
perhaps (as against the usual assumption) earlier than the Republic. See also my
Addendum II p. 320 below.*
51
The allusion is, I believe, to two places in the Story of the Number where
Plato (by speaking of ‘your race’) refers to the race of men: ‘concerning your
own race’ (546a/b; cp. note 39 to chapter 5, and text) and ‘testing the metals
within your races’ (546d/e, f.; cp. notes 39 and 40 to chapter 5, and the next
passage). Cp. also the arguments in note 52 to this chapter, concerning a ‘bridge’
between the two passages, i.e. the key passage of the philosopher king, and the
Story of the Number.
52
Republic, 546d/e, f. The passage quoted here is part of the Story of the
Number and the Fall of Man, 546a-547a, quoted in text to notes 39/40 to chapter
5; see also notes 13 and 43 to the present chapter.—My contention (cp. text to
the last note) that the remark in the key-passage of the philosopher king,
Republic, 473e (cp. notes 44 and 50 to this chapter), foreshadows the Story of
the Number, is strengthened by the observation that there exists a bridge, as it
were, between the two passages. The Story of the Number is undoubtedly
foreshadowed by Republic, 536a/b, a passage which, on the other hand, may be
described as the converse (and so as a variation) of the philosopher king
passage; for it says in effect that the worst must happen if the wrong men are
selected as rulers, and it even finishes up with a direct reminiscence of the great
wave: ‘if we take men of another kind .. then we shall bring down upon
philosophy another deluge of laughter’. This clear reminiscence is, I believe, an
indication that Plato was conscious of the character of the passage (which
proceeds, as it were, from the end of 473c-e back to its beginning), which shows
what must happen if the advice given in the passage of the philosopher king is
neglected. Now this ‘converse’ passage (536a/b) may be described as a bridge
between the ‘key passage’ (473e) and the ‘Number-passage’ (546d, ff.); for it
contains unambiguous references to racialism, foreshadowing the passage (546d,
f.) on the same subject to which the present note is appended. (This may be
interpreted as additional evidence that racialism was in Plato’s mind, and
alluded to, when he wrote the passage of the philosopher king.) I now quote the
beginning of the ‘converse’ passage (536a/b): ‘We must distinguish carefully
between the true-born and the bastard. For if an individual or a city does not
know how to look upon matters such as these, they will quite innocently accept

the services of the unbalanced (or limping) bastards in any capacity; perhaps as
friends, or even as rulers.’ (Cp. also note 47 to this chapter.)
For something like an explanation of Plato’s preoccupation with matters of
racial degeneration and racial breeding, see text to notes 6, 7, and 63 to chapter
10, in connection with note 39 (3) and 40 (2) to chapter 5.
* For the passage about Codrus the martyr, quoted in the next paragraph of
the text, see the Symposium, 208d, quoted more fully in note 4 to chapter 3.—R.
Eisler (Caucasica, 5, 1928, p. 129, note 237) asserts that ‘Codrus’ is a preHellenic word for ‘king’. This would give some further colour to the tradition
that Athens’ nobility was autochthonous. (See note 11 (2) to this chapter; 52 to
chapter 8; and Republic 368a and 580b/c.) *
53
A. E. Taylor, Plato (1908, 1914), p. 122 f. I agree with this interesting
passage as far as it is quoted in the text. I have, however, omitted the word
‘patriot’ after ‘Athenian’ since I do not fully agree with this characterization of
Plato in the sense in which it is used by Taylor. For Plato’s ‘patriotism’ cp. text
to notes 14-18 to chapter 4. For the term ‘patriotism’, and the ‘paternal state’,
cp. notes 23-26 and 45 to chapter 10.
54
Republic, 494b: ‘But will not one who is of this type be first in
everything, from childhood on?’
55
Op. cit., 496c: ‘Of my own spiritual sign, I need not speak.’
56
Cp. what Adam says in his ed. of the Republic, notes to 495d23 and
495e31, and my note 47 to the present chapter. (See also note 59 to this chapter.)
57
Republic, 496c-d; cp. the Seventh Letter, 325d. (I do not think that
Barker, Greek Political Theory, I, 107, n. 2, makes a good guess when he says
of the passage quoted that ‘it is possible .. that Plato is thinking of the Cynics’.
The passage certainly does not refer to Antisthenes; and Diogenes, whom Barker
must have in mind, was hardly famous when it was written, quite apart from the
fact that Plato would not have referred to him in this way.)
(1) Earlier in the same passage of the Republic, there is another remark
which may be a reference to Plato himself. Speaking of the small band of the
worthy and those who belong to it, he mentions ‘a nobly-born and well-bred
character who was saved by flight’ (or ‘by exile’; saved, that is, from the fate of
Alcibiades, who became a victim of flattery and deserted Socratic philosophy).
Adam thinks (note to 496b9) that ‘Plato was hardly exiled’; but the flight to
Megara of Socrates’ disciples after the death of their master may well stand out
in Plato’s memory as one of the turning-points of his life. That the passage
refers to Dio is hardly possible since Dio was about 40 when he went into exile,
and therefore well beyond the critical youthful age; and there was not (as in
Plato’s case) a parallelism with the Socratic companion Alcibiades (quite apart
from the fact that Plato had resisted Dio’s banishment, and had tried to get it
rescinded). If we assume that the passage refers to Plato, then we shall have to
assume the same of 502a: ‘Who will doubt the possibility that kings or
aristocrats may have a descendant who is a born philosopher?’; for the
continuation of that passage is so similar to the previous one that they seem to
refer to the same ‘nobly-born character’. This interpretation of 502a is probable
in itself, for we must remember that Plato always showed his family pride, for
instance, in the eulogy on his father and on his brothers, whom he calls ‘divine’.
(Rep., 368a; I cannot agree with Adam, who takes the remark as ironical; cp.
also the remark on Plato’s alleged ancestor Codrus in Symp., 208d, together with
his alleged descent from Attica’s tribal kings.) If this interpretation is adopted,

the reference in 499b-c to ‘rulers, kings, or their sons’, which fits Plato perfectly
(he was not only a Codride, but also a descendant of the ruler Dropides), would
have to be considered in the same light, i.e. as a preparation for 502a. But this
would solve another puzzle. I have in mind 499b and 502a. It is difficult, if not
impossible, to interpret these passages as attempts to flatter the younger
Dionysius, since such an interpretation could hardly be reconciled with the
unmitigated violence and the admittedly (576a) personal background of Plato’s
attacks (572-580) upon the older Dionysius. It is important to note that Plato
speaks in all three passages (473d, 499b, 502a) about hereditary kingdoms
(which he opposes so strongly to tyrannies) and about ‘dynasties’; but we know
from Aristotle’s Politics, 1292b2 (cp. Meyer, Gesch. d. Altertums, V, p. 56) and
1293a11, that ‘dynasties’ are hereditary oligarchic families, and therefore not so
much the families of a tyrant like Dionysius, but rather what we call now
aristocratic families, like that of Plato himself. Aristotle’s statement is
supported by Thucydides, IV, 78, and Xenophon, Hellenica, V, 4, 46. (These
arguments are directed against Adam’s second note to 499b13.) See also note 4
to chapter 3.
* (2) Another important passage which contains a revealing self-reference is
to be found in the Statesman. Here the essential characteristic of the royal
statesman is assumed (258b, 292c) to be his knowledge or science; and the result
is another plea for sophocracy: ‘The only right government is that in which the
rulers are true Masters of Science’ (293c). And Plato proves that ‘the man who
possesses the Royal Science, whether he rules or does not rule, must, as our
argument shows, be proclaimed royal’ (292e/293a). Plato certainly claimed to
possess the Royal Science; accordingly, this passage implies unequivocally that
he considered himself a ‘man who must be proclaimed royal’. This illuminating
passage must not be neglected in any attempt to interpret the Republic. (The
Royal Science, of course, is again that of the romantic pedagogue and breeder of
a master class which must provide the fabric for covering and holding together
the other classes—the slaves, labourers, clerks, etc., discussed in 289c, ff. The
task of the Royal Science is thus described as that of ‘interweaving’ (blending,
mixing) ‘of the characters of temperate and courageous men, when they have
been drawn together, by kingscraft, into a community life of unanimity and
friendship’. See also notes 40 (2) to chapter 5; 29 to chapter 4; and note 34 to the
present chapter.) *
58
In a famous passage in the Phaedo (89d) Socrates warns against
misanthropy or hatred of men (with which he compares misology or distrust in
rational argument). See also note 28 and 56 to chapter 10, and note 9 to chapter
7.
The next quotation in this paragraph is from Republic, 489b/c.—The
connection with the previous passages is more obvious if the whole of 488 and
489 is considered, and especially the attack in 489e upon the ‘many’
philosophers whose wickedness is inevitable, i.e. the same ‘many’ and
‘incomplete natures’ whose suppression is discussed in notes 44 and 47 to this
chapter.
An indication that Plato had once dreamt of becoming the philosopher king
and saviour of Athens can be found, I believe, in the Laws, 704a-707c, where
Plato tries to point out the moral dangers of the sea, of seafaring, trade, and
imperialism. (Cp. Aristotle, Pol., 1326b-1327a, and my notes 9-22 and 36 to
chapter 10, and text.)

See especially Laws, 704d.: ‘If the city were to be built on the coast, and
well supplied with natural harbours .. then it would need a mighty saviour, and
indeed, a super-human legislator, to make her escape variability and
degeneration.’ Does this not read as if Plato wanted to show that his failure in
Athens was due to the super-human difficulties created by the geography of the
place? (But in spite of all disappointments—cp. note 25 to chapter 7—Plato still
believes in the method of v/inning over a tyrant; cp. Laws, 710c/d, quoted in text
to note 24 to chapter 4.)
59
There is a passage (beginning in Republic, 498d/e; cp. note 12 to chapter
9) in which Plato even expresses his hope that ‘the many’ may change their
minds and accept philosophers as rulers, once they have learned (perhaps from
the Republic?) to distinguish between the genuine philosopher and the pseudophilosopher.
With the last two lines of the paragraph in the text, cp. Republic, 473e-474a,
and 517a/b.
60
Sometimes such dreams have even been openly confessed. F. Nietzsche,
The Will to Power (ed. 1911, Book IV, Aphor. 958; the reference is to Theages,
125e/126a), writes: ‘In Plato’s Theages it is written: “Every one of us wants to
be the lord of all men, if it were only possible—and most of all he would like to
be the Lord God Himself.” This is the spirit which must come again.’ I need not
comment upon Nietzsche’s political views; but there are other philosophers,
Platonists, who have naively hinted that if a Platonist were, by some lucky
accident, to gain power in a modern state, he would move towards the Platonic
Ideal, and leave things at least nearer perfection than he found them. ‘.. men
born into an “oligarchy” or “democracy”’, we read (in the context this may well
be an allusion to England in 1939), ‘with the ideals of Platonic philosophers and
finding themselves, by some fortunate turn of circumstance, possessed of
supreme political power, would certainly try to actualise the Platonic State, and
even if they were not completely successful, as they might be, would at least
leave the commonwealth nearer to that model than they found it.’ (Quoted from
A. E. Taylor, ‘The Decline and Fall of the State in Republic, VIII’, Mind, N.S.
48, 1939, p. 31.) The argument in the next chapter is directed against such
romantic dreams. * A searching analysis of the Platonic lust for power can be
found in H. Kelsen’s brilliant article Platonic Love (The American Imago, vol.
III, 1942, pp. I ff.).*
61
Op. cit., 520a-521c, the quotation is from 520d.
62
Cp. G. B. Stern, The Ugly Dachshund, 1938.

Notes To Chapter 9
The motto, from Les Thibaults, by Roger Martin du Gard, is quoted from p.
575 of the English edition (Summer 1914, London, 1940).
1
My description of Utopian social engineering seems to coincide with that
kind of social engineering advocated by M. Eastman in Marxism: Is it Science?;
see especially pp. 22 ff. I have the impression that Eastman’s views represent
the swing of the pendulum from historicism to Utopian engineering. But I may
possibly be mistaken, and what Eastman really has in mind may be more in the
direction of what I call piecemeal engineering. Roscoe Pound’s conception of
‘social engineering’ is clearly ‘piecemeal’; cp. note 9 to chapter 3. See also note
18 (3) to chapter 5.

2

I believe that there is, from the ethical point of view, no symmetry
between suffering and happiness, or between pain and pleasure. Both the
greatest happiness principle of the Utilitarians and Kant’s principle ‘Promote
other people’s happiness ..’ seem to me (at least in their formulations) wrong on
this point which, however, is not completely decidable by rational argument.
(For the irrational aspect of ethical beliefs, see note 11 to the present chapter,
and for the rational aspect, sections II and especially III of chapter 24). In my
opinion (cp. note 6 (2) to chapter 5) human suffering makes a direct moral
appeal, namely, the appeal for help, while there is no similar call to increase the
happiness of a man who is doing well anyway. (A further criticism of the
Utilitarian formula ‘Maximize pleasure’ is that it assumes, in principle, a
continuous pleasure-pain scale which allows us to treat degrees of pain as
negative degrees of pleasure. But, from the moral point of view, pain cannot be
outweighed by pleasure, and especially not one man’s pain by another man’s
pleasure. Instead of the greatest happiness for the greatest number, one should
demand, more modestly, the least amount of avoidable suffering for all; and
further, that unavoidable suffering—such as hunger in times of an unavoidable
shortage of food—should be distributed as equally as possible.) There is some
kind of analogy between this view of ethics and the view of scientific
methodology which I have advocated in my The Logic of Scientific Discovery. It
adds to clarity in the field of ethics if we formulate our demands negatively, i.e.
if we demand the elimination of suffering rather than the promotion of
happiness. Similarly, it is helpful to formulate the task of scientific method as
the elimination of false theories (from the various theories tentatively proffered)
rather than the attainment of established truths.
3
A very good example of this kind of piecemeal engineering, or perhaps of
the corresponding piecemeal technology, are C. G. F. Simkin’s two articles on
‘Budgetary Reform’ in the Australian Economic Record (1941, pp. 192 ff., and
1942, pp. 16 ff.) I am glad to be able to refer to these two articles since they
make conscious use of the methodological principles which I advocate; they
thus show that these principles are useful in the practice of technological
research.
I do not suggest that piecemeal engineering cannot be bold, or that it must
be confined to ‘smallish’ problems. But I think that the degree of complication
which we can tackle is governed by the degree of our experience gained in
conscious and systematic piecemeal engineering.
4
This view has recently been emphasized by F. A. von Hayek in various
interesting papers (cp. for instance his Freedom and the Economic System,
Public Policy Pamphlets, Chicago, 1939). What I call ‘Utopian engineering’
corresponds largely, I believe, to what Hayek would call ‘centralized’ or
‘collectivist’ planning. Hayek himself recommends what he calls ‘planning for
freedom’. I suppose he would agree that this would take the character of
‘piecemeal engineering’. One could, I believe, formulate Hayek’s objections to
collectivist planning somewhat like this. If we try to construct society according
to a blueprint, then we may find that we cannot incorporate individual freedom
in our blueprint; or if we do, that we cannot realize it. The reason is that
centralized economic planning eliminates from economic life one of the most
important functions of the individual, namely his function as a chooser of the
product, as a free consumer. In other words, Hayek’s criticism belongs to the
realm of social technology. He points out a certain technological impossibility,

namely that of drafting a plan for a society which is at once economically
centralized and individualistic.
* Readers of Hayek’s The Road to Serfdom (1944) may feel puzzled by this
note; for Hayek’s attitude in this book is so explicit that no room is left for the
somewhat vague comments of my note. But my note was printed before Hayek’s
book was published; and although many of his leading ideas were foreshadowed
in his earlier writings, they were not yet quite as explicit as in The Road to
Serfdom. And many ideas which, as a matter of course, we now associate with
Hayek’s name were unknown to me when I wrote my note.
In the light of what I know now about Hayek’s position, my summary of it
does not appear to me to be mistaken, although it is, no doubt, an
understatement of his position. The following modifications may perhaps put the
matter right.
(a) Hayek would not himself use the word ‘social engineering’ for any
political activity which he would be prepared to advocate. He objects to this
term because it is associated with a general tendency which he has called
scientism’—the naive belief that the methods of the natural sciences (or, rather,
what many people believe to be the methods of the natural sciences) must
produce similarly impressive results in the social field. (Cp. Hayek’s two series
of articles, Scientism and the Study of Society, Economica, IX-XI 1942-44, and
The Counter-resolution of Science, ibid., VIII, 1941.)
If by ‘scientism’ we mean a tendency to ape, in the field of social science,
what are supposed to be the methods of the natural sciences, then historicism
can be described as a form of scientism. A typical and influential scientistic
argument in favour of historicism is, in brief, this: ‘We can predict eclipses; why
should we not be able to predict revolutions?’; or, in a more elaborate form:
‘The task of science is to predict; thus the task of the social sciences must be to
make social, i.e. historical, predictions.’ I have tried to refute this kind of
argument (cp. my The Poverty of Historicism, and Prediction and Prophecy, and
their Significance for Social Theory, Proceedings of the Xth International
Congress of Philosophy, Amsterdam, 1948; now in my Conjectures and
Refutations); and in this sense, I am opposed to scientism.
But if by ‘scientism’ we should mean the view that the methods of the
social sciences are, to a very considerable extent, the same as those of the
natural sciences, then I should be obliged to plead ‘guilty’ to being an adherent
of ‘scientism’; indeed, I believe that the similarity between the social and the
natural sciences can even be used for correcting wrong ideas about the natural
sciences by showing that these are much more similar to the social sciences than
is generally supposed.
It is for this reason that I have continued to use Roscoe Pound’s term ‘social
engineering’ in Roscoe Pound’s sense, which as far as I can see, is free of that
‘scientism’ which, I think, must be rejected.
Terminology apart, I still think that Hayek’s views can be interpreted as
favourable to what I call ‘piecemeal engineering’. On the other hand, Hayek has
given a much clearer formulation of his views than my old outline indicates. The
part of his views which corresponds to what I should call ‘social engineering’
(in Pound’s sense) is his suggestion that there is an urgent need, in a free
society, to reconstruct what he describes as its ‘legal framework’.*
5
Bryan Magee has drawn my attention to what he rightly calls ‘de
Tocqueville’s superbly put argument’ in L’ancien regime.

6

The problem whether or not a good end justifies bad means seems to arise
out of such cases as whether one should lie to a sick man in order to set his mind
at rest; or whether one should keep a people in ignorance in order to make them
happy; or whether one should begin a long and bloody civil war in order to
establish a world of peace and beauty.
In all these cases the action contemplated is to bring about first a more
immediate result (called ‘the means’) which is considered an evil, in order that a
secondary result (called ‘the end’) may be brought about which is considered a
good.
I think that in all such cases three different kinds of questions arise:
(a) How far are we entitled to assume that the means will in fact lead to the
expected end? Since the means are the more immediate result, they will in most
cases be the more certain result of the contemplated action, and the end, which is
more remote, will be less certain.
The question here raised is a factual question rather than one of moral
valuations. It is the question whether, as a matter of fact, the assumed causal
connection between the means and the end can be relied upon; and one might
therefore reply that, if the assumed causal connection does not hold, the case
was simply not one of means and ends.
This may be true. But in practice, the point here considered contains what is
perhaps the most important moral issue. For although the question (whether the
contemplated means will bring about the contemplated end) is a factual one, our
attitude towards this question raises some of the most fundamental moral
problems—the problem whether we ought to rely, in such cases, on our of
conviction that such a causal connection holds; or in other words, whether we
ought to rely, dogmatically, on causal theories, or whether we should adopt a
sceptical attitude towards them, especially where the immediate result of our
action is, in itself, considered evil.
This question is perhaps not so important in the first of our three examples,
but it is so in the two others. Some people may feel very certain that the causal
connections assumed in these two cases hold; but the connection may be a very
remote one; and even the emotional certainty of their belief may itself be the
result of an attempt to suppress their doubts. (The issue, in other words, is that
between the fanatic and the rationalist in the Socratic sense—the man who tries
to know his intellectual limitations.) The issue will be the more important the
greater the evil of ‘the means’. However that may be, to educate oneself so as to
adopt an attitude of scepticism towards one’s causal theories, and one of
intellectual modesty, is, without doubt, one of the most important moral duties.
But let us assume that the assumed causal connection holds, or in other
words, that there is a situation in which one can properly speak of means and
ends. Then we have to distinguish between two further questions, (b) and (c).
(b) Assuming that the causal relation holds, and that we can be reasonably
certain of it, the problem becomes, in the main, one of choosing the lesser of two
evils—that of the contemplated means and that which must arise if these means
are not adopted. In other words, the best of ends do not as such justify bad
means, but the attempt to avoid results may justify actions which are in
themselves producing bad results. (Most of us do not doubt that it is right to cut
off a man’s limb in order to save his life.)
In this connection it may become very important that we are not really able
to assess the evils in question. Some Marxists, for example (cp. note 9 to chapter

19), believe that there would be far less suffering involved in a violent social
revolution than in the chronic evils inherent in what they call ‘Capitalism’. But
even assuming that this revolution leads to a better state of affairs—how can
they evaluate the suffering in the one state and in the other? Here, again, a
factual question arises, and it is again our duty not to over-estimate our factual
knowledge. Besides, granted that the contemplated means will on balance
improve the situation—have we ascertained whether other means would not
achieve better results, at a lesser price?
But the same example raises another very important question. Assuming,
again, that the sum total of suffering under ‘Capitalism’ would, if it continues
for several generations, outweigh the suffering of civil war—can we condemn
one generation to suffer for the sake of later generations? (There is a great
difference between sacrificing oneself for the sake of others, and between
sacrificing others—or oneself and others—for some such end.)
(c) The third point of importance is that we must not think that the so-called
‘end’, as a final result, is more important than the intermediate result, the
‘means’. This idea, which is suggested by such sayings as ‘All is well that ends
well’, is most misleading. First, the so-called ‘end’ is hardly ever the end of the
matter. Secondly, the means are not, as it were, superseded once the end is
achieved. For example, ‘bad’ means, such as a new powerful weapon used in
war for the sake of victory, may, after this ‘end’ is achieved, create new trouble.
In other words, even if something can be correctly described as a means to an
end, it is, very often, much more than this. It produces other results apart from
the end in question; and what we have to balance is not the (past or present)
means against (future) ends, but the total results, as far as they can be foreseen,
of one course of action against those of another. These results spread over a
period of time which includes intermediate results; and the contemplated ‘end’
will not be the last to be considered.
7
(1) I believe that the parallelism between the institutional problems of civil
and of international peace is most important. Any international organization
which has legislative, administrative and judicial institutions as well as an
armed executive which is prepared to act should be as successful in upholding
international peace as are the analogous institutions within the state. But it
seems to me important not to expect more. We have been able to reduce crime
within the states to something comparatively unimportant, but we have not been
able to stamp it out entirely. Therefore we shall, for a long time to come, need a
police force which is ready to strike, and which sometimes does strike.
Similarly, I believe that we must be prepared for the probability that we may not
be able to stamp out international crime. If we declare that our aim is to make
war impossible once and for all, then we may undertake too much, with the fatal
result that we may not have a force which is ready to strike when these hopes are
disappointed. (The failure of the League of Nations to take action against
aggressors was, at least in the case of the attack on Manchukuo, due largely to
the general feeling that the League had been established in order to end all wars
and not to wage them. This shows that propaganda for ending all wars is selfdefeating. We must end international anarchy, and be ready to go to war against
any international crime. (Cp. especially H. Mannheim, War and Crime, 1941;
and A. D. Lindsay, ‘War to End War’, in Background and Issues, 1940.)
But it is also important to search for the weak spot in the analogy between
civil and international peace, that is to say, for the point where the analogy

breaks down. In the case of civil peace, upheld by the state, there is the
individual citizen to be protected by the state. The citizen is, as it were, a
‘natural’ unit or atom (although there is a certain ‘conventional’ element even in
the conditions of citizenship). On the other hand, the members or units or atoms
of our international order will be states. But a state can never be a ‘natural’ unit
like the citizen; there are no natural boundaries to a state. The boundaries of a
state change, and can be denned only by applying the principle of a status quo;
and since every status quo must refer to an arbitrarily chosen date, the
determination of the boundaries of a state is purely conventional.
The attempt to find some ‘natural’ boundaries for states, and accordingly, to
look upon the state as a ‘natural’ unit, leads to the principle of the national state
and to the romantic fictions of nationalism, racialism, and tribalism. But this
principle is not ‘natural’, and the idea that there exist natural units like nations,
or linguistic or racial groups, is entirely fictitious. Here, if anywhere, we should
learn from history; for since the dawn of history, men have been continually
mixed, unified, broken up, and mixed again; and this cannot be undone, even if
it were desirable.
There is a second point in which the analogy between civil and international
peace breaks down. The state must protect the individual citizen, its units or
atoms; but the international organization also must ultimately protect human
individuals, and not its units or atoms, i.e. states or nations. The complete
renunciation of the principle of the national state (a principle which owes its
popularity solely to the fact that it appeals to tribal instincts and that it is the
cheapest and surest method by which a politician who has nothing better to offer
can make his way), and the recognition of the necessarily conventional
demarcation of all states, together with the further insight that human
individuals and not states or nations must be the ultimate concern even of
international organizations, will help us to realize clearly, and to get over, the
difficulties arising from the breakdown of our fundamental analogy. (Cp. also
chapter 12, notes 51-64 and text, and note 2 to chapter 13.)
(2) It seems to me that the remark that human individuals must be
recognized to be the ultimate concern not only of international organizations, but
of all politics, international as well as ‘national’ or parochial, has important
applications. We must realize that we can treat individuals fairly, even if we
decide to break up the power-organization of an aggressive state or ‘nation’ to
which these individuals belong. It is a widely held prejudice that the destruction
and control of the military, political and even of the economic power of a state
or ‘nation’ implies misery or subjugation for its individual citizens. But this
prejudice is as unwarranted as it is dangerous.
It is unwarranted provided that an international organization protects the
citizens of the thus weakened state against exploitation of their political and
military weakness. The only damage to the individual citizen that cannot be
avoided is one to his national pride; and if we assume that he was a citizen of an
aggressor country, then this is a damage which will be unavoidableable in any
case, provided the aggression has been warded off.
The prejudice that we cannot distinguish between the treatment of a state
and of its individual citizens is also very dangerous, for when it comes to the
problem of dealing with an aggressor country, it necessarily creates two factions
in the victorious countries, viz., the faction of those who demand harsh

treatment and those who demand leniency. As a rule, both overlook the
possibility of treating a state harshly, and, at the same time, its citizens leniently.
But if this possibility is overlooked, then the following is likely to happen.
Immediately after the victory the aggressor state and its citizens will be treated
comparatively harshly. But the state, the power-organization, will probably not
be treated as harshly as might be reasonable because of a reluctance to treat
innocent individuals harshly, that is to say, because the influence of the faction
for leniency will make itself felt somehow. In spite of this reluctance, it is likely
that individuals will suffer beyond what they deserve. After a short time,
therefore, a reaction is likely to occur in the victorious countries. Equalitarian
and humanitarian tendencies are likely to strengthen the faction for leniency
until the harsh policy is reversed. But this development is not only likely to give
the aggressor state a chance for a new aggression; it will also provide it with the
weapon of the moral indignation of one who has been wronged, while the
victorious countries are likely to become afflicted with the diffidence of those
who feel that they may have done wrong.
This very undesirable development must in the end lead to a new
aggression. It can be avoided if, and only if, from the start, a clear distinction is
made between the aggressor state (and those responsible for its acts) on the one
hand, and its citizens on the other hand. Harshness towards the aggressor state,
and even the radical destruction of its power apparatus, will not produce this
moral reaction of humanitarian feelings in the victorious countries if it is
combined with a policy of fairness towards the individual citizens.
But is it possible to break the political power of a state without injuring its
citizens indiscriminately? In order to prove that this is possible I shall construct
an example of a policy which breaks the political and military power of an
aggressor state without violating the interests of its individual citizens.
The fringe of the aggressor country, including its sea-coast and its main (not
all) sources of water power, coal, and steel, could be severed from the state, and
administered as an international territory, never to be returned. Harbours as well
as the raw materials could be made accessible to the citizens of the state for their
legitimate economic activities, without imposing any economic disadvantages
on them, on the condition that they invite international commissions to control
the proper use of these facilities. Any use which may help to build up a new war
potential is forbidden, and if there is reason for suspicion that the
internationalized facilities and raw materials may be so used, their use has at
once to be stopped. It then rests with the suspect party to invite and to facilitate a
thorough investigation, and to offer satisfactory guarantees for a proper use of
its resources.
Such a procedure would not eliminate the possibility of a new attack but it
would force the aggressor state to make its attack on the internationalized
territories previous to building up a new war potential. Thus such an attack
would be hopeless provided the other countries have retained and developed
their war potential. Faced with this situation the former aggressor state would be
forced to change its attitude radically, and adopt one of co-operation. It would
be forced to invite the international control of its industry and to facilitate the
investigation of the international controlling authority (instead of obstructing
them) because only such an attitude would guarantee its use of the facilities
needed by its industries; and such a development would be likely to take place
without any further interference with the internal politics of the state.

The danger that the internationalization of these facilities might be misused
for the purpose of exploiting or of humiliating the population of the defeated
country can be counter-acted by international legal measures that provide for
courts of appeal, etc.
This example shows that it is not impossible to treat a state harshly and its
citizens leniently.
* (I have left parts (1) and (2) of this note exactly as they were written in
1942. Only in part (3), which is non-topical, have I made an addition, after the
first two paragraphs.) *
(3) But is such an engineering approach towards the problem of peace
scientific? Many will contend, I am sure, that a truly scientific attitude towards
the problems of war and peace must be different. They will say that we must first
study the causes of war. We must study the forces that lead to war, and also
those that may lead to peace. It has been recently claimed, for instance, that
‘lasting peace’ can come only if we consider fully the ‘underlying dynamic
forces’ in society that may produce war or peace. In order to find out these
forces, we must, of course, study history. In other words, we must approach the
problem of peace by a historicist method, and not by a technological method.
This, it is claimed, is the only scientific approach.
The historicist may, with the help of history, show that the causes of war
can be found in the clash of economic interests; or in the clash of classes; or of
ideologies, for instance, freedom versus tyranny; or in the clash of races, or of
nations, or of imperialisms, or of militarist systems; or in hate; or in fear; or in
envy; or in the wish to take revenge; or in all these things together, and in
countless others. And he will thereby show that the task of removing these
causes is extremely difficult. And he will show that there is no point in
constructing an international organization, as long as we have not removed the
causes of war, for instance the economic causes, etc.
Similarly, psychologism may argue that the causes of war are to be found in
‘human nature’, or, more specifically, in its aggressiveness, and that the way to
peace is that of preparing for other outlets for aggression. (The reading of
thrillers has been suggested in all seriousness—in spite of the fact that some of
our late dictators were addicted to them.)
I do not think that these methods of dealing with this important problem are
very promising. And I do not believe, more especially, in the plausible argument
that in order to establish peace we must ascertain the cause or the causes of war.
Admittedly, there are cases where the method of searching for the causes of
some evil, and of removing them, may be successful. If I feel a pain in my foot I
may find that it is caused by a pebble and remove it. But we must not generalize
from this. The method of removing pebbles does not even cover all cases of
pains in my foot. In some such cases I may not find ‘the cause’; and in others I
may be unable to remove it.
In general, the method of removing causes of some undesirable event is
applicable only if we know a short list of necessary conditions (i.e. a list of
conditions such that the event in question never happens except if one at least of
the conditions on the list is present) and if all of these conditions can be
controlled, or, more precisely, prevented. (It may be remarked that necessary
conditions are hardly what one describes by the vague term ‘causes’; they are,
rather, what are usually called ‘contributing causes’; as a rule, where we speak
of ‘causes’ we mean a set of sufficient conditions.) But I do not think that we

can hope to construct such a list of the necessary conditions of war. Wars have
broken out under the most varying circumstances. Wars are not simple
phenomena, such as, perhaps, thunderstorms. There is no reason to believe that
by calling a vast variety of phenomena ‘wars’, we ensure that they are all
‘caused’ in the same way.
All this shows that the apparently unprejudiced and convincingly scientific
approach, the study of the ‘causes of war’, is, in fact, not only prejudiced, but
also liable to bar the way to a reasonable solution; it is, in fact, pseudo-scientific.
How far should we get if, instead of introducing laws and a police force, we
approached the problem of criminality ‘scientifically’, i.e. by trying to find out
what precisely are the causes of crime? I do not imply that we cannot here or
there discover important factors contributing to crime or to war, and that we
cannot avert much harm in this way; but this can well be done after we have got
crime under control, i.e. after we have introduced our police force. On the other
hand, the study of economic, psychological, hereditary, moral, etc., ‘causes’ of
crime, and the attempt to remove these causes, would hardly have led us to find
out that a police force (which does not remove the cause) can bring crime under
control. Quite apart from the vagueness of such phrases as ‘the cause of war’,
the whole approach is anything but scientific. It is as if one insisted that it is
unscientific to wear an overcoat when it is cold; and that we should rather study
the causes of cold weather, and remove them. Or, perhaps, that lubricating is
unscientific, since we should rather find out the causes of friction and remove
them. This latter example shows, I believe, the absurdity of the apparently
scientific criticism; for just as lubrication certainly reduces the ‘causes’ of
friction, so an international police force (or another armed body of this kind)
may reduce an important ‘cause’ of war, namely the hope of ‘getting away with
it’.
8
I have tried to show this in my The Logic of Scientific Discovery. I believe,
in accordance with the methodology outlined, that systematic piecemeal
engineering will help us to build an empirical social technology, reached by the
method of trial and error. Only in this way, I believe, can we begin to build an
empirical social science. The fact that such a social science hardly exists so far,
and that the historical method is incapable of furthering it much, is one of the
strongest arguments against the possibility of large-scale or Utopian social
engineering. See also my The Poverty of Historicism.
9
For a very similar formulation, see John Carruthers’ lecture Socialism &
Radicalism (published as a pamphlet by the Hammersmith Socialist Society,
London, 1894). He argues in a typical manner against piecemeal reform:
Every palliative measure brings its own evil with it, and the evil is generally
greater than that it was intended to cure. Unless we make up our minds to have a
new garment altogether, we must be prepared to go in rags, for patching will not
improve the old one.’ (It should be noted that by ‘radicalism’, Used by
Carruthers in the title of his lecture, he means about the opposite of what is
meant here. Carruthers advocates an uncompromising programme of canvascleaning and attacks ‘radicalism’, i.e. the programme of ‘progressive’ reforms
advocated by the ‘radical liberals’, This use of the term ‘radical’ is, of course,
more customary than mine; nevertheless, the term means originally ‘going to the
root’—of the evil, for instance—or ‘eradicating the evil’; and there is no proper
substitute for it.)

For the quotations in the next paragraph of the text (the ‘divine original’
which the artist-politician must ‘copy’), see Republic, 500c/501a. See also notes
25 and 26 to chapter 8.
In Plato’s Theory of Forms are, I believe, elements which are of great
importance for the understanding, and for the theory, of art. This aspect of
Platonism is treated by J. A. Stewart, in his book Plato’s Doctrine of Ideas
(1909), 128 ff. I believe, however, that he stresses too much the object of pure
contemplation (as opposed to that ‘pattern’ which the artist not only visualizes,
but which he labours to reproduce, on his canvas).
10
Republic, 520c For the ‘Royal Art’, see especially the Statesman; cp. note
57 (2) to chapter 8.
11
It has often been said that ethics is only a part of aesthetics, since ethical
questions are ultimately a matter of taste. (Cp. for instance G. E. G. Catlin, The
Science and Methods of Politics, 315 ff.) If by saying this, no more is meant
than that ethical problems cannot be solved by the rational methods of science, I
agree. But we must not overlook the vast difference between moral ‘problems of
taste’ and problems of taste in aesthetics. If I dislike a novel, a piece of music, or
perhaps a picture, I need not read it, or listen to it, or look at it. Aesthetic
problems (with the possible exception of architecture) arc largely of a private
character, but ethical problems concern men, and their lives. To this extent, there
is a fundamental difference between them.
12
For this and the preceding quotations, cp. Republic, 500d-501a (italics
mine); cp. also notes 29 (end) to chapter 4, and 25, 26, 37, 38 (especially 25 and
38) to chapter 8.
The two quotations in the next paragraph are from the Republic, 541a, and
from the Statesman, 293c-e.
It is interesting (because it is, I believe, characteristic of the hysteria of
romantic radicalism with its hubris—its ambitious arrogance of godlikeness) to
see that both passages of the Republic—the canvas-cleaning of 500d, ff., and the
purge of 541a—are preceded by reference to the godlikeness of the
philosophers; cp. 500c-d, ‘the philosopher becomes .. godlike himself, and 540cd (cp. note 37 to chapter 8 and text), ‘And the state will erect monuments, at the
expense of the public, to commemorate them; and sacrifices will be offered to
them, as demigods,.. or at least as men who are blessed by grace, and godlike.’
It is also interesting (for the same reasons) that the first of these passages is
preceded by the passage (498d/e, f.; see note 59 to chapter 8) in which Plato
expresses his hope that philosophers may become, as rulers, acceptable even to
‘the many’.
* Concerning the term ‘liquidate’ the following modern outburst of
radicalism may be quoted: ‘Is it not obvious that if we are to have socialism—
real and permanent socialism—all the fundamental opposition must be
“liquidated” (i.e. rendered politically inactive by disfranchisement, and if
necessary by imprisonment)?’ This remarkable rhetorical question is printed on
p. 18 of the still more remarkable pamphlet Christians in the Class Struggle, by
Gilbert Cope, with a Foreword by the Bishop of Bradford. (1942; for the
historicism of this pamphlet, see note 3 to chapter 1.) The Bishop, in his
Foreword, denounces ‘our present economic system’ as ‘immoral and unChristian’, and he says that ‘when something is so plainly the work of the devil
... nothing can excuse a minister of the Church from working for its destruction’.
Accordingly, he recommends the pamphlet ‘as a lucid and penetrating analysis’.

A few more sentences may be quoted from the pamphlet. ‘Two parties may
ensure partial democracy, but a full democracy can be established only by a
single party ...’ (p. 17).—‘In the period of transition .. the workers .. must be led
and organized by a single party which tolerates the existence of no other party
fundamentally opposed to it ...’ (p. 19).—‘Freedom in the socialist state means
that no one is allowed to attack the principle of common ownership, but
everyone is encouraged to work for its more effective realization and operation
... The important matter of how the opposition is to be nullified depends upon
the methods used by the opposition itself (p. 18).
Most interesting of all is perhaps the following argument (also to be found
on p. 18) which deserves to be read carefully: ‘Why is it possible to have a
socialist party in a capitalist country if it is not possible to have a capitalist party
in a socialist state? The answer is simply that the one is a movement involving
all the productive forces of a great majority against a small minority, while the
other is an attempt of a minority to restore their position of power and privilege
by renewed exploitation of the majority.’ In other words, a ruling ‘small
minority’ can afford to be tolerant, while a ‘great majority’ cannot afford to
tolerate a ‘small minority’. This simple answer is indeed a model of ‘a lucid and
penetrating analysis’, as the Bishop puts it.*
13
Cp. for this development also chapter 13, especially note 7, and text.
14
It seems that romanticism, in literature as well as in philosophy, may be
traced back to Plato. It is well known that Rousseau was directly influenced by
him (cp. note 1 to chapter 6). Rousseau also knew Plato’s Statesman (cp. the
Social Contract, Book II, ch. VII, and Book III, ch. VI) with its eulogy of the
early hill-shepherds. But apart from this direct influence, it is probable that
Rousseau derived his pastoral romanticism and love for primitivity indirectly
from Plato; for he was certainly influenced by the Italian Renaissance, which
had rediscovered Plato, and especially his naturalism and his dreams of a perfect
society of primitive shepherds (cp. notes 11 (3) and 32 to chapter 4 and note 1 to
chapter 6).—It is interesting that Voltaire recognized at once the dangers of
Rousseau’s romantic obscurantism; just as Kant was not prevented by his
admiration for Rousseau from recognizing this danger when he was faced with it
in Herder’s ‘Ideas’ (cp. also note 56 to chapter 12, and text).

Notes To Chapter 10
This chapter’s motto is taken from the Symposium.
1
Cp. Republic, 4198, ff., 42tb, 465c, ff., and 519e; see also chapter 6,
especially sections II and IV.
2
I am thinking not only of the medieval attempts to arrest society, attempts
that were based on the Platonic theory that the rulers are responsible for the
souls, the spiritual welfare of the ruled (and on many practical devices
developed by Plato in the Republic and in the Laws), but I am thinking also of
many later developments.
3
I have tried, in other words, to apply as far as possible the method which I
have described in my The Logic of Scientific Discovery.
4
Cp. especially Republic, 566e; see also below, note 63 to this chapter.
5
In my story there should be ‘no villains .. Crime is not interesting .. It is
what men do at their best, with good intentions .. that really concerns us’. I have
tried as far as possible to apply this methodological principle to my

interpretation of Plato. (The formulation of the principle quoted in this note I
have taken from G. B. Shaw’s Preface to Saint Joan; see the first sentences in
the section ‘Tragedy, not Melodrama’.)
6
For Heraclitus, see chapter 2. For Alcmaeon’s and Herodotus’ theories of
isonomy. see notes 13, 14, and 17, to chapter 6. For Phaleas of Chalcedon’s
economic equalitarianism, see Aristotle’s Politics, 126e2, and Diels5, chapter 39
(also on Hippodamus). For Hippodamus of Miletus, see Aristotle’s Politics,
1267b22, and note 9 to chapter 3. Among the first political theorists, we must, of
course, also count the Sophists, Protagoras, Antiphon, Hippias, Alcidamas,
Lycophron; Critias (cp. Diels5, fr. 6, 30-38, and note 17 to chapter 8), and the
Old Oligarch (if these were two persons); and Democritus. For the terms ‘closed
society’ and ‘open society’, and their use in a somewhat similar sense by
Bergson, see the Note to the Introduction. My characterization of the closed
society as magical and of the open society as rational and critical of course
makes it impossible to apply these terms without idealizing the society in
question. The magical attitude has by no means disappeared from our life, not
even in the most ‘open’ societies so far realized, and I think it unlikely that it
can ever completely disappear. In spite of this, it seems to be possible to give
some useful criterion of the transition from the closed society to the open. The
transition takes place when social institutions are first consciously recognized as
man-made, and when their conscious alteration is discussed in terms of their
suitability for the achievement of human aims or purposes. Or, putting the
matter in a less abstract way, the closed society breaks down when the
supernatural awe with which the social order is considered gives way to active
interference, and to the conscious pursuit of personal or group interests. It is
clear that cultural contact through civilization may engender such a breakdown,
and, even more, the development of an impoverished, i.e. landless, section of the
ruling class.
I may mention here that I do not like to speak of ‘social breakdown’ in a
general way. I think that the breakdown of a closed society, as described here, is
a fairly clear affair, but in general the term ‘social breakdown’ seems to me to
convey very little more than that the observer does not like the course of the
development he describes. I think that the term is much misused. But I admit
that, with or without reason, the member of a certain society might have the
feeling that ‘everything is breaking down’. There is little doubt that to the
members of the ancien regime or of the Russian nobility, the French or the
Russian revolution must have appeared as a complete social breakdown; but to
the new rulers it appeared very differently. Toynbee (cp. A Study of History, V,
23-35; 338) describes ‘the appearance of schism in the body social’ as a
criterion of a society which has broken down. Since schism, in the form of class
disunion, undoubtedly occurred in Greek society long before the Peloponnesian
war, it is not quite clear why he holds that this war (and not the breakdown of
tribalism) marks what he describes as the breakdown of Hellenic civilization.
(Cp. also note 45 (2) to chapter 4, and note 8 to the present chapter.)
Concerning the similarity between the Greeks and the Maoris, some
remarks can be found in Burnet’s Early Greek Philosophy2, especially pp. 2 and
9.
7
I owe this criticism of the organic theory of the state, together with many
other suggestions, to J. Popper-Lynkeus; he writes (Die allgemeine Nährpflicht,
2nd ed., 1923, pp. 71 f.): ‘The excellent Menenius Agrippa .. persuaded the

insurgent plebs to return’ (to Rome) ‘by telling them his simile of the body’s
members who rebelled against the belly ... Why did not one of them say: “Right,
Agrippa! If there must be a belly, then we, the plebs, want to be the belly from
now on; and you .. may play the role of the members!”’ (For the simile, see Livy
II, 32, and Shakespeare’s Coriolanus, Act 1, Scene i.) It is perhaps interesting to
note that even a modern and apparently progressive movement like ‘MassObservation’ makes propaganda for the organic theory of society (on the cover
of its pamphlet, First Year’s Work, 1937-38). See also note 31 to chapter 5.
On the other hand, it must be admitted that the tribal ‘closed society’ has
something like an ‘organic’ character, just because of the absence of social
tension. The fact that such a society may be based on slavery (as it was the case
with the Greeks) does not create in itself a social tension, because slaves
sometimes form no more part of society than its cattle; their aspirations and
problems do not necessarily create anything that is felt by the rulers as a
problem within society. Population growth, however, does create such a
problem. In Sparta, which did not send out colonies, it led first to the
subjugation of neighbouring tribes for the sake of winning their territory, and
then to a conscious effort to arrest all change by measures that included the
control of population increase through the institution of infanticide, birth
control, and homosexuality. All this was seen quite clearly by Plato, who always
insisted (perhaps under the influence of Hippodamus) on the need for a fixed
number of citizens, and who recommended in the Laws colonization and birth
control, as he had earlier recommended homosexuality (explained in the same
way in Aristotle’s Politics, 1272a23) as means for keeping the population
constant; see Laws, 740d-741a, and 838e. (For Plato’s recommendation of
infanticide in the Republic, and for similar problems, see especially note 34 to
chapter 4; furthermore, notes 22 and 63 to chapter 10, and 39 (3) to chapter 5.)
Of course, all these practices are far from being completely explicable in
rational terms; and the Dorian homosexuality, more especially, is closely
connected with the practice of war, and with the attempts to recapture, in the life
of the war horde, an emotional satisfaction which had been largely destroyed by
the breakdown of tribalism; see especially the ‘war horde composed of lovers’,
glorified by Plato in the Symposium, 178e. In the Laws, 636b, f., 836b/c, Plato
deprecates homosexuality (cp., however, 838e).
8
I suppose that what I call the ‘strain of civilization’ is similar to the
phenomenon which Freud had in mind when writing Civilization and its
Discontents. Toynbee speaks of a Sense of Drift (A Study of History, V, 412 ff.),
but he confines it to ‘ages of disintegration’, while I find my strain very clearly
expressed in Heraclitus (in fact, traces can be found in Hesiod)—long before the
time when, according to Toynbee, his ‘Hellenic society’ begins to ‘disintegrate’.
Meyer speaks of the disappearance of ‘The status of birth, which had determined
every man’s place in life, his civil and social rights and duties, together with the
security of earning his living’ (Geschichte des Altertums, III, 542). This gives an
apt description of the strain in Greek society of the fifth century B.C..
9
Another profession of this kind which led to comparative intellectual
independence, was that of a wandering bard. I am thinking here mainly of
Xenophanes, the progressivist; cp. the paragraph on ‘Protagoreanism’ in note 7
to chapter 5. (Homer also may be a case in point.) It is clear that this profession
was accessible to very few men.

I happen to have no personal interest in matters of commerce, or in
Commercially minded people. But the influence of commercial initiative seems
to me rather important. It is hardly an accident that the oldest known
civilization, that of Sumer, was, as far as we know, a commercial civilization
with strong democratic features; and that the arts of writing and arithmetic, and
the beginnings of science, were closely connected with its commercial life. (Cp.
also text to note 24 to this chapter.)
10
Thucydides, I, 93 (I mostly follow Jowett’s translation). For the problem
of Thucydides’ bias, cp. note 15 (1) to this chapter.
11
This and the next quotation: op. cit., I, 107. Thucydides’ story of the
treacherous oligarchs can hardly be recognized in Meyer’s apologetic version
(Gesch. d. Altertums, III, 594), in spite of the fact that he has no better sources;
it is simply distorted beyond recognition. (For Meyer’s partiality, see note 15 (2)
to the present chapter.)—For a similar treachery (in 479 B.C., on the eve of
Plataea) cp. Plutarch’s Aristides, 13.
12
Thucydides, III, 82-84. The following conclusion of the passage is
characteristic of the element of individualism and humanitarianism present in
Thucydides, a member of the Great Generation (see below, and note 27 to this
chapter) and, as mentioned above, a moderate: ‘When men take revenge, they
are reckless; they do not consider the future, and do not hesitate to annul those
common laws of humanity on which every individual must rely for his own
deliverance should he ever be overtaken by calamity; they forget that in their
own hour of need they will look for them in vain.’ For a further discussion of
Thucydides’ bias see note 15 (1) to this chapter.
13
Aristotle, Politics, VIII, (V), 9, 10/11; 1310a. Aristotle does not agree
with such open hostility; he thinks it wiser that ‘true Oligarchs should affect to
be advocates of the people’s cause’; and he is anxious to give them good advice:
‘They should take, or they should at least pretend to take, the opposite line, by
including in their oath the pledge: I shall do no harm to the people.’
14
Thucydides, II, 9.
15
Cp. E. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, IV (1915), 368.
(1) In order to judge Thucydides’ alleged impartiality, or rather, his
involuntary bias, one must compare his treatment of the most important affair of
Plataea which marked the outbreak of the first part of the Peloponnesian war
(Meyer, following Lysias, calls this part the Archidamian war; cp. Meyer,
Gesch. d. Altertums, IV, 307, and V, p. VII) with his treatment of the Melian
affair, Athens’ first aggressive move in the second part (the war of Alcibiades).
The Archidamian war broke out with an attack on democratic Plataea—a
lightning attack made without declaration of war by Thebes, a partner of
totalitarian Sparta, whose friends inside Plataea, the oligarchic fifth column, had
by night opened the doors of Plataea to the enemy. Though most important as
the immediate cause of the war, the incident is comparatively briefly related by
Thucydides (II, 1-7); he does not comment upon the moral aspect, apart from
calling ‘the affair of Plataea a glaring violation of the thirty years truce’; but he
censures (II, 5) the democrats of Plataea for their harsh treatment of the
invaders, and even expresses doubts whether they did not break an oath. This
method of presentation contrasts strongly with the famous and most elaborate,
though of course fictitious, Melian Dialogue (Thuc., V, 85-113) in which
Thucydides tries to brand Athenian imperialism. Shocking as the Melian affair
seems to have been (Alcibiades may have been responsible; cp. Plutarch, Alc.,

16), the Athenians did not attack without warning, and tried to negotiate before
using force.
Another case in point, bearing on Thucydides’ attitude, is his eulogy (in
VIII, 68) of the oligarchic party leader, the orator Antiphon (who is mentioned
in Plato’s Menexenus, 236a, as a teacher of Socrates; cp. end of note 19 to
chapter 6).
(2) E. Meyer is one of the greatest modern authorities on this period. But to
appreciate his point of view one must read the following scornful remarks on
democratic governments (there are a great many passages of this kind): ‘Much
more important’ (viz., than to arm) ‘was it to continue the entertaining game of
party-quarrels, and to secure unlimited freedom, as interpreted by everybody
according to his particular interests.’ (V, 61.) But is it more, I ask, than an
‘interpretation according to his particular interests’ when Meyer writes: ‘The
wonderful freedom of democracy, and of her leaders, have manifestly proved
their inefficiency.’ (V, 69.) About the Athenian democratic leaders who in 403
B.C. refused to surrender to Sparta (and whose refusal was later even justified
by success—although no such justification is necessary), Meyer says: ‘Some of
these leaders might have been honest fanatics;.. they might have been so utterly
incapable of any sound judgement that they really believed’ (what they said,
namely:) ‘that Athens must never capitulate.’ (IV, 659.) Meyer censures other
historians in the strongest terms for being biased. (Cp. e.g. the notes in V, 89 and
102, where he defends the older tyrant Dionysius against allegedly biased
attacks, and 113 bottom to 114 top, where he is also exasperated by some antiDionysian ‘parroting historians’.) Thus he calls Grote ‘an English radical
leader’, and his work ‘not a history, but an apology for Athens’, and he proudly
contrasts himself with such men: ‘It will hardly be possible to deny that we have
become more impartial in questions of politics, and that we have arrived thereby
at a more correct and more comprehensive historical judgement.’ (All this in III,
239.)
Behind Meyer’s point of view stands—Hegel. This explains everything (as
will be clear, I hope, to readers of chapter 12). Meyer’s Hegelianism becomes
obvious in the following remark, which is an unconscious but nearly literal
quotation from Hegel; it is in III, 256, when Meyer speaks of a ‘flat and
moralizing evaluation, which judges great political undertakings with the
yardstick of civil morality’ (Hegel speaks of ‘the litany of private virtues’),
‘ignoring the deeper, the truly moral factors of the state, and of historical
responsibilities’. (This corresponds exactly to the passages from Hegel quoted in
chapter 12, below; cp. note 75 to chapter 12.) I wish to use this opportunity once
more to make it clear that I do not pretend to be impartial in my historical
judgement. Of course I do what I can to ascertain the relevant facts. But I am
aware that my evaluations (like anybody else’s) must depend entirely on my
point of view. This I admit, although I fully believe in my point of view, i.e. that
my evaluations are right.
16
Cp. Meyer, op. cit., IV, 367.
17
Cp. Meyer, op. cit., IV, 464.
18
It must however be kept in mind that, as the reactionaries complained,
slavery was in Athens on the verge of dissolution. Cp. the evidence mentioned
in notes 17, 18 and 29 to chapter 4; furthermore, notes 13 to chapter 5, 48 to
chapter 8, and 27-37 to the present chapter.
19
Cp. Meyer, op. cit., IV, 659.

Meyer comments upon this move of the Athenian democrats: ‘Now when it
was too late they made a move towards a political constitution which later
helped Rome .. to lay the foundations of its greatness.’ In other words, instead of
crediting the Athenians with a constitutional invention of the first order, he
reproaches them; and the credit goes to Rome, whose conservatism is more to
Meyer’s taste.
The incident in Roman history to which Meyer alludes is Rome’s alliance,
or federation, with Gabii. But immediately before, and on the very page on
which Meyer describes this federation (in V, 135) we can read also: ‘All these
towns, when incorporated with Rome, lost their existence .. without even
receiving a political organization of the type of Attica’s “demes”.’ A little later,
in V, 147, Gabii is again referred to, and Rome in her generous ‘liberality’ again
contrasted with Athens; but at the turn of the same page Meyer reports without
criticism Rome’s looting and total destruction of Veii, which meant the end of
Etruscan civilization.
The worst perhaps of all these Roman destructions is that of Carthage. It
took place at a moment when Carthage was no longer a danger to Rome, and it
robbed Rome, and us, of most valuable contributions which Carthage could have
made to civilization. I only mention the great treasures of geographical
information which were destroyed there. (The story of the decline of Carthage is
not unlike that of the fall of Athens in 404 B.C., discussed in this chapter below;
see note 48. The oligarchs of Carthage preferred the fall of their city to the
victory of democracy.)
Later, under the influence of Stoicism, derived indirectly from Antisthenes,
Rome began to develop a very liberal and humanitarian outlook. It reached the
height of this development in those centuries of peace after Augustus (cp. for
instance Toynbee, A Study of History, V, pp. 343-346), but it is here that some
romantic historians see the beginning of her decline.
Regarding this decline itself, it is, of course, naive and romantic to believe,
as many still do, that it was due to the degeneration caused by long-continued
peace, or to demoralization, or to the superiority of the younger barbarian
peoples, etc.; in brief, to over-feeding. (Cp. note 45 (3) to chapter 4.) The
devastating result of violent epidemics (cp. H. Zinsser, Rats, Lice, and History,
1937, pp. 131 ff.) and the unchecked and progressive exhaustion of the soil, and
with it a breakdown of the agricultural basis of the Roman economic system (cp.
V. G. Simkhovitch, ‘Hay and History’, and ‘Rome’s Fall Reconsidered’, in
Towards the Understanding of Jesus, 1927), seem to have been some of the
main causes. Cp. also W. Hegemann, Entlarvte Geschichte (1934).
20
Thucydides, VII, 28; cp. Meyer, op. cit., IV, 535. The important remark
that ‘this would yield more’ enables us, of course, to fix an approximate upper
limit for the ratio between the taxes previously imposed and the volume of trade.
21
This is an allusion to a grim little pun which I owe to P. Milford: ‘A
Plutocracy is preferable to a Lootocracy.’
22
Plato, Republic, 423b. For the problem of keeping the size of the
population constant, cp. note 7, above.
23
Cp. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, IV, 577.
24
Op. cit., V, 27. Cp. also note 9 to this chapter, and text to note 30 to
chapter 4. * For the passage from the Laws, see 742a-c. Plato elaborates here the
Spartan attitude. He lays down ‘a law that forbids private citizens to possess any
gold or silver ... Our citizens should be allowed only such coins as are legal

tender among ourselves, but valueless elsewhere ... For the sake of an
expeditionary force, or official visit abroad, such as embassies or other
necessary missions .. it is necessary that the state should always possess Hellenic
(gold) coinage. And if a private citizen should ever be obliged to go abroad, he
may do so, provided he has duly obtained permission from the magistrates. And
should he have, upon his return, any foreign money left, then he must surrender
it to the state, and accept its equivalent in home currency. And should anybody
be found to keep it, then it must be confiscated, and he who imported it, and
anybody who failed to inform against him, should be liable to curses and
condemnations, and, in addition, to a fine of not less than the amount of the
money involved.’ Reading this passage, one wonders whether one does not
wrong Plato in describing him as a reactionary who copied the laws of the
totalitarian township of Sparta; for here he anticipates by more than 2000 years
the principles and practices which nowadays are nearly universally accepted as
sound policy by the most progressive Western European democratic
governments (who, like Plato, hope that some other government will look after
the ‘Universal Hellenic gold currency’).
A later passage (Laws, 950d) has, however, less of a liberal Western ring.
‘First, no man under forty years shall obtain permission for going abroad to
whatever place it may be. Secondly, nobody shall obtain such permission in a
private capacity: in a public capacity, permission may be granted only to
heralds, ambassadors, and to certain missions of inspection ... And these men,
after their return, will teach the young that the political institutions of other
countries are inferior to their own.’
Similar laws are laid down for the reception of strangers. For
‘intercommunication between states necessarily results in a mixing of characters
and in importing novel customs; and this must cause the greatest harm to people
who enjoy .. the right laws’ (949e/950a).*
25
This is admitted by Meyer (op. cit., IV, 433 f.), who in a very interesting
passage says of the two parties: ‘each of them claims that it defends “the
paternal state”.., and that the opponent is infected with the modern spirit of
selfishness and revolutionary violence. In reality, both are infected ... The
traditional customs and religion are more deeply rooted in the democratic party;
its aristocratic enemies who fight under the flag of the restoration of the ancient
times, are .. entirely modernized.’ Cp. also op. cit., V, 4 f., 14, and the next note.
26
From Aristotle’s Athenian Constitution, ch. 34, §3, we learn that the
Thirty Tyrants professed at first what appeared to Aristotle a ‘moderate’
programme, viz., that of the ‘paternal state’.—For the nihilism and the
modernity of Critias, cp. his theory of religion discussed in chapter 8 (see
especially note 17 to that chapter) and note 48 to the present chapter.
27
It is most interesting to contrast Sophocles’ attitude towards the new faith
with that of Euripides. Sophocles complains (cp. Meyer, op. cit., IV, III): ‘It is
wrong that .. the lowly born should flourish, while the brave and nobly born are
unfortunate.’ Euripides replies (with Antiphon; cp. note 13 to chapter 5) that the
distinction between the nobly and the low born (especially slaves) is merely
verbal: ‘The name alone brings shame upon the slave.’—For the humanitarian
element in Thucydides, cp. the quotation in note 12 to this chapter. For the
question how far the Great Generation was connected with cosmopolitan
tendencies, see the evidence marshalled in note 48 to chapter 8—especially the
hostile witnesses, i.e. the Old Oligarch, Plato, and Aristotle.

28

‘Misologists’, or haters of rational argument, are compared by Socrates to
‘misanthropists’, or haters of men; cp. the Phaedo, 89c. In contrast, cp. Plato’s
misanthropic remark in the Republic, 496c-d (cp. notes 57 and 58 to chapter 8).
29
The quotations in this paragraph are from Democritus’ fragments, Diels,
Vorsokratiker5, fragments number 41; I 79; 34; 261; 62; 55; 251; 247
(genuineness questioned by Diels and by Tarn, cp. note 48 to chapter 8); 118.
30
Cp. text to note 16, chapter 6.
31
Cp. Thucydides, II, 37-41. Cp. also the remarks in note 16 to chapter 6.
32
Cp. T. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, Book V, ch. 13, 3 (Germ. ed., II, 407).
33
Herodotus’ work with its pro-democratic tendency (cp., for example, III,
80) appeared about a year or two after Pericles’ oration (cp. Meyer, Gesch. d.
Altertums, IV, 369).
34
This has been pointed out for instance by T. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers,
V, 13, 2 (Germ, ed., II, 406 f.); the passages in the Republic to which he draws
attention are: 557d and 561c, ff. The similarity is undoubtedly intentional. Cp.
also Adam’s edition of the Republic, vol. II, 235, note to 557d26. See also the
Laws, 699d/e, ff., and 704d-707d. For a similar observation regarding Herodotus
III, 80, see note 17 to chapter 6.
35
Some hold the Menexenus to be spurious, but I believe that this shows
only their tendency to idealize Plato. The Menexenus is vouched for by
Aristotle, who quotes a remark from it as due to the ‘Socrates of the Funeral
Dialogue’ (Rhetoric, I, 9, 30 = 1367b8; and III, 14, 11 = 1415b30). See
especially also end of note 19 to chapter 6; also note 48 to chapter 8 and notes
15 (1) and 61 to the present chapter.
36
The Old Oligarch’s (or the Pseudo-Xenophon’s) Constitution of Athens
was published in 424 B.C. (according to Kirchhoff, quoted by Gomperz, Greek
Thinkers, Germ, ed., I, 477). For its attribution to Critias, cp. J. E. Sandys,
Aristotle’s Constitution of Athens, Introduction IX, especially note 3. See also
notes 18 and 48 to this chapter. Its influence upon Thucydides is, I think,
noticeable in the passages quoted in notes 10 and 11 to this chapter. For its
influence upon Plato, see especially note 59 to chapter 8, and Laws, 704a-707d.
(Cp. Aristotle, Politics, 1326b-1327a; Cicero, De Republica, II, 3 and 4.)
37
I am alluding to M. M. Rader’s book, No Compromise—The Conflict
between Two Worlds (1939), an excellent criticism of the ideology of fascism.
With the allusion, later in this paragraph, to Socrates’ warning against
misanthropy and misology, cp. note 28, above.
38
*(1) for the theory that what may be called ‘the invention of critical
thought’ consists in the foundation of a new tradition—the tradition of critically
discussing the traditional myths and theories—see my Towards a Rational
Theory of Tradition, The Rationalist Annual, 1949; now in Conjectures and
Refutations. (Only such a new tradition can explain the fact that, in the Ionian
School, the three first generations produced three different philosophies.) *
(2) Schools (especially Universities) have retained certain aspects of
tribalism ever since. But we must think not only of their emblems, or of the Old
School Tie with all its social implications of caste, etc., but also of the
patriarchal and authoritarian character of so many schools. It was not just an
accident that Plato, when he had failed to re-establish tribalism, founded a
school instead; nor is it an accident that schools are so often bastions of reaction,
and school teachers dictators in pocket edition.

As an illustration of the tribalistic character of these early schools, I give
here a list of some of the taboos of the early Pythagoreans. (The list is from
Burnet’s Early Greek Philosophy2, 106, who takes it from Diels; cp.
Vorsokratiker5, vol. I, pp. 97 ff.; but see also Aristoxenus’ evidence in op. cit., p.
101.) Burnet speaks of ‘genuine taboos of a thoroughly primitive type’.—To
abstain from beans.—Not to pick up what has fallen.—Not to touch a white
cock.—Not to break bread.—Not to step over a crossbar.—Not to stir the fire
with iron.—Not to eat from a whole loaf.—Not to pluck a garland.—Not to sit
on a quart measure.—Not to eat the heart.—Not to walk on highways.—Not to
let the swallows share one’s roof.—When the pot is taken off the fire, not to
leave the mark of it in the ashes, but to stir them together.—Not to look in a
mirror beside a light.—After rising from the bedclothes, to roll them together
and to smooth out the impress of the body.
39
An interesting parallelism to this development is the destruction of
tribalism through the Persian conquests. This social revolution led, as Meyer
points out (op. cit., vol. III, 167 ff.), to the emergence of a number of prophetic,
i.e. in our terminology, of historicist, religions of destiny, degeneration, and
salvation, among them that of the ‘chosen people’, the Jews (cp. chapter 1).
Some of these religions were also characterized by the doctrine that the
creation of the world is not yet concluded, but still going on. This must be
compared with the early Greek conception of the world as an edifice and with
the Heraclitean destruction of this conception, described in chapter 2 (see note 1
to that chapter). It may be mentioned here that even Anaximander felt uneasy
about the edifice. His stress upon the boundless or indeterminate or indefinite
character of the building-material may have been the expression of a feeling that
the building may possess no definite framework, that it may be in flux (cp. next
note).
The development of the Dionysian and the Orphic mysteries in Greece is
probably dependent upon the religious development of the east (cp. Herodotus,
II, 81). Pythagoreanism, as is well known, had much in common with Orphic
teaching, especially regarding the theory of the soul (see also note 44 below).
But Pythagoreanism had a definitely ‘aristocratic’ flavour, as opposed to the
Orphic teaching which represented a kind of ‘proletarian’ version of this
movement. Meyer (op. cit., III, p. 428, § 246) is probably right when he
describes the beginnings of philosophy as a rational counter-current against the
movement of the mysteries; cp. Heraclitus’ attitude in these matters (fragm. 5,
14, 15; and 40, 129, Diels5; 124-129; and 16-17, Bywater). He hated the
mysteries and Pythagoras; the Pythagorean Plato despised the mysteries. (Rep.,
364e, f.; cp. however Adam’s Appendix IV to Book IX of the Republic, vol. II,
378 ff., of his edition.)
40
For Anaximander (cp. the preceding note), see Diels5, fragm. 9: ‘The
origin of things ... is some indeterminate (or boundless) nature;.. out of those
things from which existing things are generated, into these they dissolve again,
by necessity. For they do penance to one another for their offence (or injustice),
according to the order of time.’ That individual existence appeared to
Anaximander as injustice was the interpretation of Gomperz (Greek Thinkers,
Germ, ed., vol. I, p. 46; note the similarity to Plato’s theory of justice); but this
interpretation has been severely criticized.
41
Parmenides was the first to seek his salvation from this strain by
interpreting his dream of the arrested world as a revelation of true reality, and

the world of flux in which he lived as a dream. ‘The real being is indivisible. It
is always an integrated whole, which never breaks away from its order; it never
disperses, and thus need not re-unite.’ (D5, fragm. 4.) For Parmenides, cp. also
note 22 to chapter 3, and text.
42
Cp. note 9 to the present chapter (and note 7 to chapter 5).
43
Cp. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, III, 443, and IV, 120f.
44
J. Burnet, ‘The Socratic Doctrine of the Soul’, Proceedings of the British
Academy, VIII (1915/16), 235 ff. I am the more anxious to stress this partial
agreement since I cannot agree with Burnet in most of his other theories,
especially those that concern Socrates’ relations to Plato; his opinion in
particular that Socrates is politically the more reactionary of the two (Greek
Philosophy, I, 210) appears to me untenable. Cp. note 56 to this chapter.
Regarding the Socratic doctrine of the soul, I believe that Burnet is right in
insisting that the saying ‘care for your souls’ is Socratic; for this saying
expresses Socrates’ moral interests. But I think it highly improbable that
Socrates held any metaphysical theory of the soul. The theories of the Phaedo,
the Republic, etc., seem to me undoubtedly Pythagorean. (For the OrphicPythagorean theory that the body is the tomb of the soul, cp. Adam, Appendix
IV to Book IX of the Republic; see also note 39 to this chapter.) And in view of
Socrates’ clear statement in the Apology, 19c, that he had ‘nothing whatever to
do with such things’ (i.e. with speculations on nature; see note 56 (5) to this
chapter), I strongly disagree with Burnet’s opinion that Socrates was a
Pythagorean; and also with the opinion that he held any definite metaphysical
doctrine of the ‘nature’ of the soul.
I believe that Socrates’ saying ‘care for your souls’ is an expression of his
moral (and intellectual) individualism. Few of his doctrines seem to be so well
attested as his individualistic theory of the moral self-sufficiency of the virtuous
man. (See the evidence mentioned in notes 25 to chapter 5 and 36 to chapter 6.)
But this is most closely connected with the idea expressed in the sentence ‘care
for your souls’. In his emphasis on self-sufficiency, Socrates wished to say:
They can destroy your body, but they cannot destroy your moral integrity. If the
latter is your main concern, they cannot do any really serious harm to you.
It appears that Plato, when becoming acquainted with the Pythagorean
metaphysical theory of the soul, felt that Socrates’ moral attitude needed a
metaphysical foundation, especially a theory of survival. He therefore
substituted for ‘they cannot destroy your moral integrity’ the idea of the
indestructibility of the soul. (Op. also notes 9 f. to chapter 7.)
Against my interpretation, it may be contended by both metaphysicians and
positivists that there can be no such moral and non-metaphysical idea of the soul
as I ascribe to Socrates, since any way of speaking of the soul must be
metaphysical. I do not think that I have much hope of convincing Platonic
metaphysicians; but I shall attempt to show positivists (or materialists, etc.) that
they too believe in a ‘soul’, in a sense very similar to that which I attribute to
Socrates, and that most of them value that ‘soul’ more highly than the body.
First of all, even positivists may admit that we can make a perfectly
empirical and ‘meaningful’, although somewhat unprecise, distinction between
‘physical’ and ‘psychical’ maladies. In fact, this distinction is of considerable
practical importance for the organization of hospitals, etc. (It is quite probable
that one day it may be superseded by something more precise, but that is a
different question.) Now most of us, even positivists, would, if we had to

choose, prefer a mild physical malady to a mild form of insanity. Even
positivists would moreover probably prefer a lengthy and in the end incurable
physical illness (provided it was not too painful, etc.) to an equally lengthy
period of incurable insanity, and perhaps even to a period of curable insanity. In
this way, I believe, we can say without using metaphysical terms that they care
for their ‘souls’ more than for their ‘bodies’. (Cp. Phaedo, 82d: they ‘care for
their souls and are not servants of their bodies’; see also Apology, 29d-30b.) And
this way of speaking would be quite independent of any theory they might have
concerning the ‘soul’; even if they should maintain that, in the last analysis, it is
only part of the body, and all insanity only a physical malady, our conclusion
would still hold. (It would come to something like this: that they value their
brains more highly than other parts of their bodies.)
We can now proceed to a similar consideration of an idea of the ‘soul’
which is closer still to the Socratic idea. Many of us are prepared to undergo
considerable physical hardship for the sake of purely intellectual ends. We are,
for example, ready to suffer in order to advance scientific knowledge; and also
for the sake of furthering our own intellectual development, i.e. for the sake of
attaining ‘wisdom’. (For Socrates’ intellectualism, cp. for instance the Crito,
44d/e, and 47b.) Similar things could be said of the furthering of moral ends, for
instance, equalitarian justice, peace, etc. (Cp. Crito, 47e/48a, where Socrates
explains that he means by ‘soul’ that part of us which is ‘improved by justice
and depraved by injustice’.) And many of us would say, with Socrates, that these
things are more important to us than things like health, even though we like to
be in good health. And many may even agree with Socrates that the possibility
of adopting such an attitude is what makes us proud to be men, and not animals.
All this, I believe, can be said without any reference to a metaphysical
theory of the ‘nature of the soul’. And I see no reason why we should attribute
such a theory to Socrates in the face of his clear statement that he had nothing to
do with speculations of that sort.
45
In the Gorgias, which is, I believe, Socratic in parts (although the
Pythagorean elements which Gomperz has noted show, I think, that it is largely
Platonic; cp. note 56 to this chapter), Plato puts into the mouth of Socrates an
attack on ‘the ports and ship-yards and walls’ of Athens, and on the tributes or
taxes imposed upon her Allies. These attacks, as they stand, are certainly
Plato’s, which may explain why they sound very much like those of the
oligarchs. But I think it quite possible that Socrates may have made similar
remarks, in his anxiety to stress the things which, in his opinion, mattered most.
But he would, I believe, have loathed the idea that his moral criticism could be
turned into treacherous oligarchic propaganda against the open society, and
especially, against its representative, Athens. (For the question of Socrates’
loyalty, cp. esp. note 53 to this chapter, and text.)
46
The typical figures, in Plato’s works, are Callicles and Thrasymachus.
Historically, the nearest realizations are perhaps Theramenes and Critias;
Alcibiades also, whose character and deeds, however, are very hard to judge.
47
The following remarks are highly speculative and do not bear upon my
arguments.
I consider it possible that the basis of the First Alcibiades is Plato’s own
conversion by Socrates, i.e. that Plato may in this dialogue have chosen the
figure of Alcibiades to hide himself. There might have been a strong inducement
for him to tell the story of his conversion; for Socrates, when accused of being

responsible for the misdeeds of Alcibiades, Critias, and Charmides (see below),
had referred, in his defence before the court, to Plato as a living example, and as
a witness, of his true educational influence. It seems not unlikely that Plato with
his urge to literary testimony felt that he had to tell the tale of Socrates’ relations
with himself, a tale which he could not tell in court (cp. Taylor, Socrates, note 1
to p. 105). By using Alcibiades’ name and the special circumstances
surrounding him (e.g. his ambitious political dreams which might well have
been similar to those of Plato before his conversion) he would attain his
apologetic purpose (cp. text to notes 49-50), showing that Socrates’ moral
influence in general, and in particular on Alcibiades, was very different from
what his prosecutors maintained it to be. I think it not unlikely that the
Charmides is also, largely, a self-portrait. (It is not without interest to note that
Plato himself undertook similar conversions, but as far as we can judge, in a
different way; not so much by direct personal moral appeal, but rather by an
institutional teaching of Pythagorean mathematics, as a prerequisite for the
dialectical intuition of the Idea of the Good. Cp. the stories of his attempted
conversion of the younger Dionysius.) For the First Alcibiades and related
problems, see also Grote’s Plato, I, especially pp. 351-355.
48
Cp. Meyer, Geschichte des Altertums, V, 38 (and Xenophon’s Hellenica,
II, 4, 22). In the same volume, on pp. 19-23 and 36-44 (see especially p. 36) can
be found all the evidence needed for justifying the interpretation given in the
text. The Cambridge Ancient History (1927, vol. V; cp. especially pp. 369 ff.)
gives a very similar interpretation of the events.
It may be added that the number of full citizens killed by the Thirty during
the eight months of terror approached probably 1, 500, which is, as far as we
know, not much less than one-tenth (probably about 8 per cent.) of the total
number of full citizens left after the war, or I per cent, per month—an
achievement hardly surpassed even in our own day.
Taylor writes of the Thirty (Socrates, Short Biographies, 1937, p. 100, note
1): ‘It is only fair to remember that these men probably “lost their heads” under
the temptation presented by their situation. Critias had previously been known as
a man of wide culture whose political leanings were decidedly democratic.’ I
believe that this attempt to minimize the responsibility of the puppet
government, and especially of Plato’s beloved uncle, must fail. We know well
enough what to think of the short-lived democratic sentiments professed in those
days at suitable occasions by the young aristocrats. Besides, Critias’ father (cp.
Meyer, vol. IV, p. 579, and Lys., 12, 43. and 12, 66), and probably Critias
himself, had belonged to the oligarchy of he Four Hundred; and Critias’ extant
writings show his treacherous pro-Spartan leanings as well as his oligarchic
outlook (cp., for instance, Diels5, 45) and his blunt nihilism (cp. note 17 to
chapter 8) and his ambition (cp. Diels5, 15; cp. also Xenophon’s Memorabilia, I,
2, 24; and his Hellenica, II, 3, 36 and 47). But the decisive point is that he
simply tried to give consistent effect to the programme of the ‘Old Oligarch’, the
author of the Pseudo-Xenophontic Constitution of Athens (cp. note 36 to the
present chapter): to eradicate democracy; and to make a determined attempt to
do so with Spartan help, should Athens be defeated. The degree of violence used
is the logical result of the situation. It does not indicate that Critias lost his head;
rather, that he was very well aware of the difficulties. i.e. of the democrats’ still
formidable power of resistance.

Meyer, whose great sympathy for Dionysius I proves that he is at least not
prejudiced against tyrants, says about Critias (op. cit., V, p. 17), after a sketch of
his amazingly opportunistic political career, that ‘he was just as unscrupulous as
Lysander’, the Spartan conqueror, and therefore the appropriate head of
Lysander’s puppet government.
It seems to me that there is a striking similarity between the characters of
Critias, the soldier, aesthete, poet, and sceptical companion of Socrates, and of
Frederick II of Prussia, called ‘the Great’, who also was a soldier, an aesthete, a
poet, and a sceptical disciple of Voltaire, as well as one of the worst tyrants and
most ruthless oppressors in modern history. (On Frederick, cp. W. Hegemann,
Entlarvte Geschichte, 1934; see especially p. 90 on his attitude towards religion,
reminiscent of that of Critias.)
49
This point is very well explained by Taylor, Socrates, Short Biographies,
1937, p. 103, who follows here Burnet’s note to Plato’s Euthyphro, 40, 4.—The
only point in which I feel inclined to deviate, but only very slightly, from
Taylor’s excellent treatment (op. cit., 103, 120) of Socrates’ trial is in the
interpretation of the tendencies of the charge, especially of the charge
concerning the introduction of ‘novel religious practices’ (op. cit., 109 and 111
f.).
50
Evidence to show this can be found in Taylor’s Socrates, 113-115; cp.
especially 115, note 1, where Aeschines, 1, 173,is quoted: ‘You put Socrates the
Sophist to death because he was shown to have educated Critias.’
51
It was the policy of the Thirty to implicate as many people in their acts of
terrorism as they could; cp. the excellent remarks by Taylor in Socrates, 101 f.
(especially note 3 to p. 101). For Chaerephon, see note 56, (5) e6, to the present
chapter.
52
As Grossman and others do; cp. Grossman, Plato To-Day, 91/92. I agree
in this point with Taylor, Socrates, 116; see also his notes 1 and 2 to that page.
That the plan of the prosecution was not to make a martyr of Socrates; that
the trial could have been avoided, or managed differently, had Socrates been
prepared to compromise, i.e. to leave Athens, or even to promise to keep quiet,
all this seems fairly clear in view of Plato’s (or Socrates’) allusions in the
Apology as well as in the Crito. (Cp. Crito, 456 and especially 52b/c, where
Socrates says that he would have been permitted to emigrate had he offered to
do so at the trial.)
53
Cp. especially Crito, 53b/c, where Socrates explains that, if he were to
accept the opportunity for escape, he would confirm his judges in their belief;
for he who corrupts the laws is likely to corrupt the young also.
The Apology and Crito were probably written not long after Socrates’ death.
The Crito (possibly the earlier of the two) was perhaps written upon Socrates’
request that his motives in declining to escape should be made known. Indeed,
such a wish may have been the first inspiration of the Socratic dialogues. T.
Gomperz (Greek Thinkers, V, 11, I, Germ, ed., II, 358) believes the Crito to be
of later date and explains its tendency by assuming that it was Plato who was
anxious to stress his loyalty. ‘We do not know writes Gomperz, ‘the immediate
situation to which this small dialogue owes its existence; but it is hard to resist
the impression that Plato is here most interested in defending himself and his
group against the suspicion of harbouring revolutionary views.’ Although
Gomperz’s suggestion would easily fit into my general interpretation of Plato’s
views, I feel that the Crito is much more likely to be Socrates’ defence than

Plato’s. But I agree with Gomperz’s interpretation of its tendency. Socrates had
certainly the greatest interest in defending himself against a suspicion which
endangered his life’s work.—Regarding this interpretation of the contents of the
Crito, I again agree fully with Taylor (Socrates, 124 f.). But the loyalty of the
Crito and its contrast to the obvious disloyalty of the Republic which quite
openly takes sides with Sparta against Athens seems to refute Burnet’s and
Taylor’s view that the Republic is Socratic, and that Socrates was more strongly
opposed to democracy than Plato. (Cp. note 56 to this chapter.)
Concerning Socrates’ affirmation of his loyalty to democracy, cp. especially
the following passages of the Crito: 51d/e, where the democratic character of the
laws is stressed, i.e. the possibility that the citizen might change the laws
without violence, by rational argument (as Socrates puts it, he may try to
convince the laws);—52b, f., where Socrates insists that he has no quarrel with
the Athenian constitution;—53c/d, where he describes not only virtue and
justice but especially institutions and laws (those of Athens) as the best things
among men;—54c, where he says that he may be a victim of men, but insists
that he is not a victim of the laws.
In view of all these passages (and especially of Apology, 32c; cp. note 8 to
chapter 7), we must, I believe, discount the one passage which looks very
different, viz. 52e, where Socrates by implication praises the constitutions of
Sparta and Crete. Considering especially 52b/c, where Socrates said that he was
not curious to know other states or their laws, one may be tempted to suggest
that the remark on Sparta and Crete in 52e is an interpolation, made by
somebody who attempted to reconcile the Crito with later writings, especially
with the Republic. Whether that is so or whether the passage is a Platonic
addition, it seems extremely unlikely that it is Socratic. One need only
remember Socrates’ anxiety not to do anything which might be interpreted as
pro-Spartan, an anxiety of which we know from Xenophon’s Anabasis, III, 1, 5.
There we read that ‘Socrates feared that he’ (i.e. his friend, the young
Xenophon—another of the young black sheep) ‘might be blamed for being
disloyal; for Cyrus was known to have assisted the Spartans in the war against
Athens.’ (This passage is certainly much less suspect than the Memorabilia;
there is no influence of Plato here, and_ Xenophon actually accuses himself, by
implication, of having taken his obligations to his country too lightly, and of
having deserved his banishment, mentioned in op. cit., V, 3, 7, and VII, 7, 57.)
54
Apology, 30e/31 a.
55
Platonists, of course, would all agree with Taylor who says in the last
sentence of his Socrates: ‘Socrates had just one “successor”—Plato.’ Only Grote
seems sometimes to have held views similar to those stated in the text; what he
says, for instance, in the passage quoted here in note 21 to chapter 7 (see also
note 15 to chapter 8) can be interpreted as at least an expression of doubt
whether Plato did not betray Socrates. Grote makes it perfectly clear that the
Republic (not only the Laws) would have furnished the theoretical basis for
condemning the Socrates of the Apology, and that this Socrates would never
have been tolerated in Plato’s best state. And he even points out that Plato’s
theory agrees with the practical treatment meted out to Socrates by the Thirty.
(An example showing that the perversion of his master’s teaching by a pupil is a
thing that can succeed, even if the master is still alive, famous, and protests in
public, can be found in note 58 to chapter 12.)

For the remarks on the Laws, made later in this paragraph, see especially the
passages of the Laws referred to in notes 19-23 to chapter 8. Even Taylor, whose
opinions on these questions are diametrically opposed to those presented here
(see also the next note), admits: ‘The person who first proposed to make false
opinions in theology an offence against the state, was Plato himself, in the tenth
Book of the Laws.’ (Taylor, op. cit., 108, note 1.)
In the text, I contrast especially Plato’s Apology and Crito with his Laws.
The reason for this choice is that nearly everybody, even Burnet and Taylor (see
the next note), would agree that the Apology and the Crito represent the Socratic
doctrine, and that the Laws may be described as Platonic. It seems to me
therefore very difficult to understand how Burnet and Taylor could possibly
defend their opinion that Socrates’ attitude towards democracy was more hostile
than Plato’s. (This opinion is expressed in Burnet’s Greek Philosophy, I, 209 f.,
and in Taylor’s Socrates, 150 f., and 170 f.). I have seen no attempt to defend
this view of Socrates, who fought for freedom (cp. especially note 53 to this
chapter) and died for it, and of Plato, who wrote the Laws.
Burnet and Taylor hold this strange view because they are committed to the
opinion that the Republic is Socratic and not Platonic; and because it may be
said that the Republic is slightly less anti-democratic than the Platonic
Statesman and the Laws. But the differences between the Republic and the
Statesman as well as the Laws are very slight indeed, especially if not only the
first books of the Laws are considered but also the last; in fact, the agreement of
doctrine is rather closer than one would expect in two books separated by at
least one decade, and probably by three or more, and most dissimilar in
temperament and style (see note 6 to chapter 4, and many other places in this
book where the similarity, if not identity, between the doctrines of the Laws and
the Republic is shown). There is not the slightest internal difficulty in assuming
that the Republic and the Laws are both Platonic; but Burnet’s and Taylor’s own
admission that their theory leads to the conclusion that Socrates was not only an
enemy of democracy but even a greater enemy than Plato shows the difficulty if
not absurdity of their view that not only the Apology and the Crito are Socratic
but the Republic as well. For all these questions, see also the next note, and the
Addenda, III, B(2), below.
56
I need hardly say that this sentence is an attempt to sum up my
interpretation of the historical role of Plato’s theory of justice (for the moral
failure of the Thirty, cp. Xenophon’s Hellenica, II, 4, 40-42); and particularly of
the main political doctrines of the Republic; an interpretation which tries to
explain the contradictions among the early dialogues, especially the Gorgias,
and the Republic, as arising from the fundamental difference between the views
of Socrates and those of the later Plato. The cardinal importance of the question
which is usually called the Socratic Problem may justify my entering here into a
lengthy and partly methodological debate.
(1) The older solution of the Socratic Problem assumed that a group of the
Platonic dialogues, especially the Apology and the Crito, is Socratic (i.e., in the
main historically correct, and intended as such) while the majority of the
dialogues are Platonic, including many of those in which Socrates is the main
speaker, as for instance the Phaedo and the Republic. The older authorities
justified this opinion often by referring to an ‘independent witness’, Xenophon,
and by pointing out the similarity between the Xenophontic Socrates and the
Socrates of the ‘Socratic’ group of dialogues, and the dissimilarities between the

Xenophontic ‘Socrates’ and the ‘Socrates’ of the Platonic group of dialogues.
The metaphysical theory of Forms or Ideas, more especially, was usually
considered Platonic.
(2) Against this view, an attack was launched by J. Burnet, who was
supported by A. E. Taylor. Burnet denounced the argument on which the ‘older
solution’ (as I call it) is based as circular and unconvincing. It is not sound, he
held, to select a group of dialogues solely because the theory of Forms is less
prominent in them, to call them Socratic, and then to say that the theory of
Forms was not Socrates’ but Plato’s invention. And it is not sound to claim
Xenophon as an independent witness since we have no reason whatever to
believe in his independence, and good reason to believe that he must have
known a number of Plato’s dialogues when he commenced writing the
Memorabilia. Burnet demanded that we should proceed from the assumption
that Plato really meant what he said, and that, when he made Socrates
pronounce a certain doctrine, he believed, and wished his readers to believe, that
this doctrine was characteristic of Socrates’ teaching.
(3) Although Burnet’s views on the Socratic Problem appear to me
untenable, they have been most valuable and stimulating. A bold theory of this
kind, even if it is false, always means progress; and Burner’s books are full of
bold and most unconventional views on his subject. This is the more to be
appreciated as a historical subject always shows a tendency to become stale. But
much as I admire Burnet for his brilliant and bold theories, and much as I
appreciate their salutary effect, I am. considering the evidence available to me,
unable to convince myself that these theories are tenable. In his invaluable
enthusiasm, Burnet was, I believe, not always critical enough towards his own
ideas. This is why others have found it necessary to criticize these ideas instead.
Regarding the Socratic Problem, I believe with many others that the view
which I have described as the ‘older solution’ is fundamentally correct. This
view has lately been well defended, against Burnet and Taylor, especially by G.
C. Field (Plato and His Contemporaries, 1930) and A. K. Rogers (The Socratic
Problem, 1933); and many other scholars seem to adhere lo it. In spite of the
fact that the arguments so far offered appear to me convincing, I may be
permitted to add to them, using some results of the present book. But before
proceeding to criticize Burnet, I may state that it is to Burnet that we owe our
insight into the following principle of method. Plato’s evidence is the only firstrate evidence available to us; all other evidence is secondary. (Burnet has
applied this principle to Xenophon; but we must apply it also to Aristophanes,
whose evidence was rejected by Socrates himself, in the Apology; see under (5),
below.)
(4) Burnet explains that it is his method to assume ‘that Plato really meant
what he said’. According to this methodological principle, Plato’s ‘Socrates’
must be intended as a portrait of the historical Socrates. (Cp. Greek Philosophy,
I, 128, 212 f., and note on p. 349/50; cp. Taylor’s Socrates, 14 f., 32 f., 153.) I
admit that Burnet’s methodological principle is a sound starting point. But I
shall try to show, under (5), that the facts are such that they soon force
everybody to give it up, including Burnet and Taylor. They are forced, like all
others, to interpret what Plato says. But while others become conscious of this
fact, and therefore careful and critical in their interpretations, it is inevitable that
those who cling to the belief that they do not interpret Plato but simply accept

what he said make it impossible for themselves to examine their interpretations
critically.
(5) The facts that make Burnet’s methodology inapplicable and force him
and all others to interpret what Plato said, are, of course, the contradictions in
Plato’s alleged portrait of Socrates. Even if we accept the principle that we have
no better evidence than Plato’s, we are forced by the internal contradictions in
his writing not to take him at his word, and to give up the assumption that he
‘really meant what he said’. If a witness involves himself in contradictions, then
we cannot accept his testimony without interpreting it, even if he is the best
witness available. I give first only three examples of such internal
contradictions.
(a) The Socrates of the Apology very impressively repeats three times (18bc; 19c-d; 23d) that he is not interested in natural philosophy (and therefore not a
Pythagorean): ‘I know nothing, neither much nor little, about Such things’, he
said (19c); ‘I, men of Athens, have nothing whatever to do with such things’ (i.e.
with speculations about nature). Socrates asserts that many who are present at
the trial could testify to the truth of this statement; they have heard him speak,
but neither in few nor in many words has anybody ever heard him speak about
matters of natural philosophy. (Ap., 19, c-d.) On the other hand, we have (a′) the
Phaedo (cp. especially 108d, f., with the passages of the Apology referred to)
and the Republic. In these dialogues, Socrates appears as a Pythagorean
philosopher of ‘nature’; so much so that both Burnet and Taylor could say that
he was in fact a leading member of the Pythagorean school of thought. (Cp.
Aristotle, who says of the Pythagoreans ‘their discussions .. are all about
nature’; see Metaphysics, end of 989b.)
Now I hold that (a) and (a′) flatly contradict each other; and this situation is
made worse by the fact that the dramatic date of the Republic is earlier and that
of the Phaedo later than that of the Apology. This makes it impossible to
reconcile (a) with (a′) by assuming that Socrates either gave up Pythagoreanism
in the last years of his life, between the Republic and the Apology, or that he was
converted to Pythagoreanism in the last month of his life.
I do not pretend that there is no way of removing this contradiction by some
assumption or interpretation. Burnet and Taylor may have reasons, perhaps even
good reasons, for trusting the Phaedo and the Republic rather than the Apology.
(But they ought to realize that, assuming the correctness of Plato’s portrait, any
doubt of Socrates’ veracity in the Apology makes of him one who lies for the
sake of saving his skin.) Such questions, however, do not concern me at the
moment. My point is rather that in accepting evidence (a′) as against (a), Burnet
and Taylor are forced to abandon their fundamental methodological assumption
‘that Plato really meant what he said’; they must interpret.
But interpretations made unawares must be uncritical; this can be illustrated
by the use made by Burnet and Taylor of Aristophanes’ evidence. They hold that
Aristophanes’ jests would be pointless if Socrates had not been a natural
philosopher. But it so happens that Socrates (I always assume, with Burnet and
Taylor, that the Apology is historical) foresaw this very argument. In his
apology, he warned his judges against precisely this very interpretation of
Aristophanes, insisting most earnestly (Ap., 19c, ff.; see also 20c-e) that he had
neither little nor much to do with natural philosophy, but simply nothing at all.
Socrates felt as if he were lighting against shadows in this matter, against the
shadows of the past (Ap., 18d-e); but we can now say that he was also fighting

the shadows of the future. For when he challenged his fellow-citizens to come
forward—those who believed Aristophanes and dared to call Socrates a liar—
not one came. It was 2, 300 years before some Platonists made up their minds to
answer his challenge.
It may be mentioned, in this connection, that Aristophanes, a moderate antidemocrat, attacked Socrates as a ‘sophist’, and that most of the sophists were
democrats.
(b) In the Apology (40c, ff.) Socrates takes up an agnostic attitude towards
the problem of survival; (b′) the Phaedo consists mainly of elaborate proofs of
the immortality of the soul. This difficulty is discussed by Burnet (in his edition
of the Phaedo, 1911, pp. xlviii ff.), in a way which does not convince me at all.
(Cp. notes 9 to chapter 7, and 44 to the present chapter.) But whether he is right
or not, his own discussion proves that he is forced to give up his methodological
principle and to interpret what Plato says.
(c) The Socrates of the Apology holds that the wisdom even of the wisest
consists in the realization of how little he knows, and that, accordingly, the
Delphian saying ‘know thyself must be interpreted as ‘know thy limitations;’
and he implies that the rulers, more than anybody else, ought to know their
limitations. Similar views can be found in other early dialogues. But the main
speakers of the Statesman and the Laws propound the doctrine that the powerful
ought to be wise; and by wisdom they no longer mean a knowledge of one’s
limitations, but rather the initiation into the deeper mysteries of dialectic
philosophy—the intuition of the world of Forms or Ideas, or the training in the
Royal Science of politics. The same doctrine is expounded, in the Philebus, even
as part of a discussion of the Delphian saying. (Cp. note 26 to chapter 7.)
(d) Apart from these three flagrant contradictions, I may mention two
further contradictions which could easily be neglected by those who do not
believe that the Seventh Letter is genuine, but which seem to me fatal to Burnet
who maintains that the Seventh Letter is authentic. Burnet’s view (untenable
even if we neglect this letter; cp. for the whole question note 26 (5) to chapter 3)
that Socrates but not Plato held the theory of Forms, is contradicted in 342a, ff.,
of this letter; and his view that the Republic, more especially, is Socratic, in
326a (cp. note 14 to chapter 7). Of course, all these difficulties could be
removed, but only by interpretation.
(e) There are a number of similar although at the same time more subtle and
more important contradictions which have been discussed at some length in
previous chapters, especially in chapters 6, 7 and 8. I may sum up the most
important of these.
(e1) The attitude towards men, especially towards the young, changes in
Plato’s portrait in a way which cannot be Socrates’ development. Socrates died
for the right to talk freely to the young, whom he loved. But in the Republic, we
find him taking up an attitude of condescension and distrust which resembles the
disgruntled attitude of the Athenian Stranger (admittedly Plato himself) in the
Laws and the general distrust of mankind expressed so often in this work. (Cp.
text to notes 17-18 to chapter 4; 18-21 to chapter 7; and 57-58 to chapter 8.)
(e2) The same sort of thing can be said about Socrates’ attitude towards
truth and free speech. He died for it. But in the Republic, ‘Socrates’ advocates
lying; in the admittedly Platonic Statesman, a lie is offered as truth, and in the
Laws, free thought is suppressed by the establishment of an Inquisition. (Cp. the

same places as before, and furthermore notes 1-23 and 40-41 to chapter 8; and
note 55 to the present chapter.)
(e3) The Socrates of the Apology and some other dialogues is intellectually
modest; in the Phaedo, he changes into a man who is assured of the truth of his
metaphysical speculations. In the Republic, he is a dogmatist, adopting an
attitude not far removed from the petrified authoritarianism of the Statesman and
of the Laws. (Cp. text to notes 8-14 and 26 to chapter 7; 15 and 33 to chapter 8;
and (c) in the present note.)
(e4) The Socrates of the Apology is an individualist; he believes in the selfsufficiency of the human individual. In the Gorgias, he is still an individualist.
In the Republic, he is a radical collectivist, very similar to Plato’s position in the
Laws. (Cp. notes 25 and 35 to chapter 5; text to notes 26, 32, 36 and 48-54 to
chapter 6 and note 45 to the present chapter.)
(e5) Again we can say similar things about Socrates’ equalitarianism. In the
Meno, he recognizes that a slave participates in the general intelligence of all
human beings, and that he can be taught even pure mathematics; in the Gorgias,
he defends the equalitarian theory of justice. But in the Republic, he despises
workers and slaves and is as much opposed to equalitarianism as is Plato in the
Timaeus and in the Laws. (Cp. the passages mentioned under (e4); furthermore,
notes 18 and 29 to chapter 4; note 10 to chapter 7, and note 50 (3) to chapter 8,
where Timaeus, 51e, is quoted.)
(e6) The Socrates of the Apology and Crito is loyal to Athenian democracy.
In the Meno and in the Gorgias (cp. note 45 to this chapter) there are
suggestions of a hostile criticism; in the Republic (and, I believe, in the
Menexenus), he is an open enemy of democracy; and although Plato expresses
himself more cautiously in the Statesman and in the beginning of the Laws, his
political tendencies in the later part of the Laws are admittedly (cp. text to note
32 to chapter 6) identical with those of the ‘Socrates’ of the Republic. (Cp. notes
53 and 55 to the present chapter and notes 7 and 14-18 to chapter 4.)
The last point may be further supported by the following. It seems that
Socrates, in the Apology, is not merely loyal to Athenian democracy, but that he
appeals directly to the democratic party by pointing out that Chaerephon. one of
the most ardent of his disciples, belonged to their ranks. Chaerephon plays a
decisive part in the Apology, since by approaching the Oracle, he is instrumental
in Socrates’ recognition of his mission in life, and thereby ultimately in
Socrates’ refusal to compromise with the Demos. Socrates introduces this
important person by emphasizing the fact (Apol., 20e/21a) that Chaerephon was
not only his friend, but also a friend of the people, whose exile he shared, and
with whom he returned (presumably, he participated in the fight against the
Thirty); that is to say, Socrates chooses as the main witness for his defence an
ardent democrat. (There is some independent evidence for Chaerephon’s
sympathies, such as in Aristophanes’ Clouds, 104, 501 ff. Chaerephon’s
appearance in the Charmides may be intended to create a kind of balance; the
prominence of Critias and Charmides would otherwise create the impression of
a pro-Thirty manifesto.) Why does Socrates emphasize his intimacy with a
militant member of the democratic party? We cannot assume that this was
merely special pleading, intended to move his judges to be more merciful: the
whole spirit of his apology is against this assumption. The most likely
hypothesis is that Socrates, by pointing out that he had disciples in the
democratic camp, intended to deny, by implication, the charge (which also was

only implied) that he was a follower of the aristocratic party and a teacher of
tyrants. The spirit of the Apology excludes the assumption that Socrates was
pleading friendship with a democratic leader without being truly sympathetic
with the democratic cause. And the same conclusion must be drawn from the
passage (Apol., 32b-d) in which he emphasizes his faith in democratic legality,
and denounces the Thirty in no uncertain terms.
(6) It is simply the internal evidence of the Platonic dialogues which forces
us to assume that they are not entirely historical. We must therefore attempt to
interpret this evidence, by proffering theories which can be critically compared
with the evidence, using the method of trial and error. Now we have very strong
reason to believe that the Apology is in the main historical, for it is the only
dialogue which describes a public occurrence of considerable importance and
well known to a great number of people. On the other hand, we know that the
Laws are Plato’s latest work (apart from the doubtful Epinomis), and that they
are frankly ‘Platonic’. It is, therefore, the simplest assumption that the dialogues
will be historical or Socratic so far as they agree with the tendencies of the
Apology, and Platonic where they contradict these tendencies. (This assumption
brings us practically back to the position which I have described above as the
‘older solution’ of the Socratic Problem.) If we consider the tendencies
mentioned above under (e1) to (e6), we find that we can easily order the most
important of the dialogues in such a way that for any single one of these
tendencies the similarity with the Socratic Apology decreases and that with the
Platonic Laws increases. This is the series. Apology and Crito—Meno—
Gorgias—Phaedo—Republic—Statesman—Timaeus—Laws.
Now the fact that this series orders the dialogues according to all the
tendencies (e1) to (e6) is in itself a corroboration of the theory that we are here
faced with a development in Plato’3 thought. But we can get quite independent
evidence. ‘Stylometric’ investigations show that our series agrees with the
chronological order in which Plato wrote the dialogues. Lastly, the series, at
least up to the Timaeus, exhibits also a continually increasing interest in
Pythagoreanism (and Eleaticism). This must therefore be another tendency in
the development of Plato’s thought.
A very different argument is this. We know, from Plato’s own testimony in
the Phaedo, that Antisthenes was one of Socrates’ most intimate friends; and we
also know that Antisthenes claimed to preserve the true Socratic creed. It is hard
to believe that Antisthenes would have been a friend of the Socrates of the
Republic. Thus we must find a common point of departure for the teaching of
Antisthenes and Plato; and this common point we find in the Socrates of the
Apology and Crito, and in some of the doctrines put into the mouth of the
‘Socrates’ of the Meno, Gorgias, and Phaedo.
These arguments are entirely independent of any work of Plato’s which has
ever been seriously doubted (as the Alcibiades I or the Theages or the Letters).
They are also independent of the testimony of Xenophon. They are based solely
upon the internal evidence of some of the most famous Platonic dialogues. But
they agree with this secondary evidence, especially with the Seventh Letter,
where in a sketch of his own mental development (325 f.), Plato even refers,
unmistakably, to the key-passage of the Republic as his own central discovery:
‘I had to state .. that .. never will the race of men be saved from its plight before
either the race of the genuine and true philosophers gains political power, or the
ruling men in the cities become genuine philosophers, by the grace of God.’

(326a; cp. note 14 to chapter 7, and (d) in this note, above.) I cannot see how it
is possible to accept, with Burnet, this letter as genuine without admitting that
the central doctrine of the Republic is Plato’s, not Socrates’; that is to say,
without giving up the fiction that Plato’s portrait of Socrates in the Republic is
historical. (For further evidence, cp. for instance Aristotle, Sophist. El., 183b7:
‘Socrates raised questions, but gave no answers; for he confessed that he did not
know.’ This agrees with the Apology, but hardly with the Gorgias, and certainly
not with the Phaedo or the Republic. See furthermore Aristotle’s famous report
on the history of the theory of Ideas, admirably discussed by Field, op. cit.; cp.
also note 26 to chapter 3.)
(7) Against evidence of this character, the type of evidence used by Burnet
and Taylor can have little weight. The following is an example. As evidence for
his opinion that Plato was politically more moderate than Socrates, and that
Plato’s family was rather ‘Whiggish’, Burnet uses the argument that a member
of Plato’s family was named ‘Demos’. (Cp. Gorg., 481d, 513b.—It is not,
however, certain, although probable, that Demos’ father Pyrilampes here
mentioned is really identical with Plato’s uncle and stepfather mentioned in
Charm., 158a, and Parm., 126b, i.e. that Demos was a relation of Plato’s.) What
weight can this have, I ask, compared with the historical record of Plato’s two
tyrant uncles; with the extant political fragments of Critias (which remain in the
family even if Burnet is right, which he hardly is, in attributing them to his
grandfather; cp. Greek Phil., I, 338, note 1, with Charmides, 157e and 162d,
where the poetical gifts of Critias the tyrant are alluded to); with the fact that
Critias’ father had belonged to the Oligarchy of the Four Hundred (Lys., 12, 66);
and with Plato’s own writings which combine family pride with not only antidemocratic but even anti-Athenian tendencies? (Cp. the eulogy, in Timaeus, 20a,
of an enemy of Athens like Hermocrates of Sicily, father-in-law of the older
Dionysius.) The purpose behind Burnet’s argument is, of course, to strengthen
the theory that the Republic is Socratic. Another example of bad method may be
taken from Taylor, who argues (Socrates, note 2 on p. 148 f.; cp. also p. 162) in
favour of the view that the Phaedo is Socratic (cp. my note g to chapter 7):
‘In the Phaedo [720].. the doctrine that “learning is just recognition” is
expressly said by Simmias’ (this is a slip of Taylor’s pen; the speaker is Cebes)
‘speaking to Socrates, to be “the doctrine you arc so constantly repeating”.
Unless we are willing to regard the Phaedo as a gigantic and unpardonable
mystification, this seems to me proof that the theory really belongs to Socrates.’
(For a similar argument, see Burnet’s edition of the Phaedo, p. xii, end of
chapter ii.) On this I wish to make the following comments: (a) It is here
assumed that Plato considered himself a historian when writing this passage, for
otherwise his statement would not be ‘a gigantic and unpardonable
mystification’; in other words, the most questionable and the most central point
of the theory is assumed, (b) But even if Plato had considered himself a historian
(I do not think that he did), the expression ‘a gigantic .. etc.’ seems to be too
strong. Taylor, not Plato, puts ‘you’ in italics. Plato might only have wished to
indicate that he is going to assume that the readers of the dialogue are
acquainted with this theory. Or he might have intended to refer to the Meno, and
thus to himself. (This last explanation is I think almost certainly true, in view of
Phaedo, 73a, f., with the allusion to diagrams.) Or his pen might have slipped,
for some reason or other. Such things are bound to occur, even to historians.
Burnet, for example, has to explain Socrates’ Pythagoreanism; to do this he

makes Parmenides a Pythagorean rather than a pupil of Xenophanes, of whom
he writes (Greek Philosophy, I, 64): ‘the story that he founded the Eleatic school
seems to be derived from a playful remark of Plato’s which would also prove
Homer to have been a Heraclitean.’ To this, Burnet adds the footnote: ‘Plato,
Soph., 242d. See E. Gr. Ph.2, p. 140’. Now I believe that this statement of a
historian clearly implies four things, (1) that the passage of Plato which refers to
Xenophanes is playful, i.e. not meant seriously, (2) that this playfulness
manifests itself in the reference to Homer, that is, (3) by remarking that he was a
Heraclitean, which would, of course, be a very playful remark since Homer
lived long before Heraclitus, and (4) that there is no other serious evidence
connecting Xenophanes with the Eleatic School. But none of these four
implications can be upheld. For we find, (1) that the passage in the Sophist
(242d) which refers to Xenophanes is not playful, but that it is recommended by
Burnet himself, in the methodological appendix to his Early Greek Philosophy,
as important and as full of valuable historical information; (2) that it contains no
reference at all to Homer; and (3) that another passage which contains this
reference (Theaet., 179d/e; cp. 152d/e, 160d) with which Burnet mistakenly
identified Sophist, 242d, in Greek Philosophy, I (the mistake is not made in his
Early Greek Philosophy2), does not refer to Xenophanes; nor does it call Homer
a Heraclitean, but it says the opposite, namely, that some of Heraclitus’ ideas are
as old as Homer (which is, of course, much less playful); and (4), there is a clear
and important passage in Theophrastus (Phys. op., fragm. 8 = Simplicius, Phys.,
28, 4) ascribing to Xenophanes a number of opinions which we know
Parmenides shared with him and linking him with Parmenides—to say nothing
of D.L. ix, 21-3, or of Timaeus ap. Clement Strom I, 64, 2. This heap of
misunderstandings, misinterpretations, misquotations, and misleading omissions
(for the created myth, see Kirk and Raven, p. 265) can be found in one single
historical remark of a truly great historian such as Burnet. From this we must
learn that such things do happen, even to the best of historians: all men are
fallible. (A more serious example of this kind of fallibility is the one discussed
in note 26 (5) to chapter 3.)
(8) The chronological order of those Platonic dialogues which play a role in
these arguments is here assumed to be nearly the same as that of the stylometric
list of Lutoslawski (The Origin and Growth of Plato’s Logic, 1897). A list of
those dialogues which play a role in the text of this book will be found in note 5
to chapter 3. It is drawn up in such a way that there is more uncertainty of date
within each group than between the groups. A minor deviation from the
stylometric list is the position of the Euthyphro which for reasons of its content
(discussed in text to note 60 to this chapter) appears to me to be probably later
than the Crito; but this point is of little importance. (Cp. also note 47 to this
chapter.)
57
There is a famous and rather puzzling passage in the Second Letter
(314c): ‘There is no writing of Plato nor will there ever be. What goes by his
name really belongs to Socrates turned young and handsome.’ The most likely
solution of this puzzle is that the passage, if not the whole letter, is spurious.
(Cp. Field, Plato and His Contemporaries, 200 f., where he gives an admirable
summary of the reasons for suspecting the letter, and especially the passages
‘312d-313c and possibly down to 314c’; concerning 314c, an additional reason
is, perhaps, that the forger might have intended to allude to, or to give his
interpretation of, a somewhat similar remark in the Seventh Letter, 341b/c,

quoted in note 32 to chapter 8.) But if for a moment we assume with Burnet
(Greek Philosophy, I, 212) that the passage is genuine, then the remark ‘turned
young and handsome’ certainly raises a problem, especially as it cannot be taken
literally since Socrates is presented in all the Platonic dialogues as old and ugly
(the only exception is the Parmenides, where he is hardly handsome, although
still young). If genuine, the puzzling remark would mean that Plato quite
intentionally gave an idealized and not an historical account of Socrates; and it
would fit our interpretation quite well to see that Plato was indeed conscious of
re-interpreting Socrates as a young and handsome aristocrat who is, of course,
Plato himself. (Cp. also note 11 (2) to chapter 4, note 20 (1) to chapter 6, and
note 50 (3) to chapter 8.)
58
I am quoting from the first paragraph of Davies’ and Vaughan’s
introduction to their translation of the Republic. Cp. Grossman, Plato To-Day,
96.
59
(1) The ‘division’ or ‘split’ in Plato’s soul is one of the most outstanding
impressions of his work, and especially of the Republic. Only a man who had to
struggle hard to uphold his self-control or the rule of his reason over his animal
instincts could emphasize this point as much as Plato did; cp. the passages
referred to in note 34 to chapter 5, especially the story of the beast in man (Rep.,
588c), which is probably of Orphic origin, and in notes 15 (1)-(4), 17, and 19 to
chapter 3, which not only show an astonishing similarity with psycho-analytical
doctrines, but might also be claimed to exhibit strong symptoms of repression.
(See also the beginning of Book IX, 571d and 575a, which sound like an
exposition of the doctrine of the Oedipus Complex. On Plato’s attitude to his
mother, some light is perhaps thrown by Republic, 548e-549d, especially in
view of the fact that in 548e his brother Glaucon is identified with the son in
question.) * An excellent statement of the conflicts in Plato, and an attempt at a
psychological analysis of his will to power, are made by H. Kelsen in The
American Imago, vol. 3, 1942, pp. 1-110, and Werner File, The Platonic Legend,
1939.*
Those Platonists who are not prepared to admit that from Plato’s longing
and clamouring for unity and harmony and unisonity, we may conclude that he
was himself disunited and disharmonious, may be reminded that this way of
arguing was invented by Plato. (Cp. Symposium, 200a, f., where Socrates argues
that it is a necessary and not a probable inference that he who loves or desires
does not possess what he loves and desires.)
What I have called Plato’s political theory of the soul (see also text to note
32 to chapter 5), i.e. the division of the soul according to the class-divided
society, has long remained the basis of most psychologies. It is the basis of
psychoanalysis too. According to Freud’s theory, what Plato had called the
ruling Part of the soul tries to uphold its tyranny by a ‘censorship’, while the
rebellious proletarian animal-instincts, which correspond to the social
underworld, really exercise a hidden dictatorship; for they determine the policy
of the apparent ruler.—Since Heraclitus’ ‘flux’ and ‘war’, the realm of social
experience has strongly influenced the theories, metaphors, and symbols by
which we interpret the physical world around us (and ourselves) to ourselves. I
mention only Darwin’s adoption, under the influence of Malthus, of the theory
of social competition.
(2) A remark may be added here on mysticism, in its relation to the closed
and open society, and to the strain of civilization.

As McTaggart has shown, in his excellent study Mysticism (see his
Philosophical Studies, edited by S. V. Keeling, 1934, esp. pp. 47 ff.), the
fundamental ideas of mysticism are two: (a) the doctrine of the mystic union, i.e.
the assertion that there is a greater unity in the world of realities than that which
we recognize in the world of ordinary experience, and (b) the doctrine of the
mystic intuition, i.e. the assertion that there is a way of knowing which ‘brings
the known into closer and more direct relation with what is known’ than is the
relation between the knowing subject and the known object in ordinary
experience. McTaggart rightly asserts (p. 48) that ‘of these two characteristics
the mystic unity is the more fundamental’, since the mystic intuition is ‘an
example of the mystic unity’. We may add that a third characteristic, less
fundamental still, is (c) the mystic love, which is an example of mystic unity and
mystic intuition.
Now it is interesting (and this has not been seen by McTaggart) that in the
history of Greek Philosophy, the doctrine of the mystic unity was first clearly
asserted by Parmenides in his holistic doctrine of the one (cp. note 41 to the
present chapter); next by Plato, who added an elaborate doctrine of mystic
intuition and communion with the divine (cp. chapter 8), of which doctrine there
are just the very first beginnings in Parmenides; next by Aristotle, e.g. in De
Anima, 425b30 f.: ‘The actual hearing and the actual sound are merged into
one’; cp. Rep. 507c, ff., 430a20, and 431a1: ‘Actual knowledge is identical with
its object’ (see also De Anima, 404b16, and Metaphysics, 1072b20 and 1075a2,
and cp. Plato’s Timaeus, 45b-c, 47a-d; Meno, 81a, ff.; Phaedo, 79d); and next by
the Neo-Platonists, who elaborated the doctrine of the mystic love, of which
only the beginning can be found in Plato (for example, in his doctrine, Rep., 475
ff., that the philosopher loves truth, which is closely connected with the
doctrines of holism and the philosopher’s communion with the divine truth).
In view of these facts and of our historical analysis, we are led to interpret
mysticism as one of the typical reactions to the breakdown of the closed society;
a reaction which, in its origin, was directed against the open society, and which
may be described as an escape into the dream of a paradise in which the tribal
unity reveals itself as the unchanging reality.
This interpretation is in direct conflict with that of Bergson in his Two
Sources of Morality and Religion; for Bergson asserts that it is mysticism which
makes the leap from the closed to the open society.
* But it must of course be admitted (as Jacob Viner very kindly pointed out
to me in a letter) that mysticism is versatile enough to work in any political
direction; and even among the apostles of the open society, mystics and
mysticism have their representatives. It is the mystic inspiration of a better, a
less divided, world which undoubtedly inspired not only Plato, but also
Socrates.*
It may be remarked that in the nineteenth century, especially in Hegel and
Bergson, we find an evolutionary mysticism, which, by extolling change, seems
to stand in direct opposition to Parmenides’ and Plato’s hatred of change. And
yet, the underlying experience of these two forms of mysticism seems to be the
same, as shown by the fact, that an over-emphasis on change is common to both.
Both are reactions to the frightening experience of social change: the one
combined with the hope that change may be arrested; the other with a somewhat
hysterical (and undoubtedly ambivalent) acceptance of change as real, essential

and welcome.—Cp. also notes 32-33 to chapter 11, 36 to chapter 12, and 4, 6.
29, 32 and 58 to chapter 24.
60
The Euthyphro, an early dialogue, is usually interpreted as an
unsuccessful attempt of Socrates to define piety. Euthyphro himself is the
caricature of a popular ‘pietist’ who knows exactly what the gods wish. To
Socrates’ question ‘What is piety and what is impiety?’ he is made to answer:
‘Piety is acting as I do! That is to say, prosecuting any one guilty of murder,
sacrilege, or of any similar crime, whether he be your father or your mother ..;
while not to prosecute them is impiety’ (5, d/e). Euthyphro is presented as
prosecuting his father for having murdered a serf. (According to the evidence
quoted by Grote, Plato, I, note to p. 312, every citizen was bound by Attic law
to prosecute in such cases.)
61
Menexenus, 235b. Cp. note 35 to this chapter, and the end of note 19 to
chapter 6.
62
The claim that if you want security you must give up liberty has become a
mainstay of the revolt against freedom. But nothing is less true. There is, of
course, no absolute security in life. But what security can be attained depends on
our own watchfulness, enforced by institutions to help us watch—i.e. by
democratic institutions which are devised (using Platonic language) to enable
the herd to watch, and to judge, their watch-dogs.
63
With the ‘variations’ and ‘irregularities’, cp. Republic, 547a, quoted in
the text to notes 39 and 40 to chapter 5. Plato’s obsession with the problems of
propagation and birth control may perhaps be explained in part by the fact that
he understood the implications of population growth. Indeed (cp. text to note 7
to this chapter) the ‘Fall’, the loss of the tribal paradise, is caused by a ‘natural’
or ‘original’ fault of man, as it were: by a maladjustment in his natural rate of
breeding. Cp. also notes 39 (3) to ch. 5, and 34 to ch. 4. With the next quotation
further below in this paragraph, cp. Republic, 566e, and text to note 20 to
chapter 4.—Grossman, whose treatment of the period of tyranny in Greek
history is excellent (cp. Plato To-Day, 27-30), writes: ‘Thus it was the tyrants
who really created the Greek State. They broke down the old tribal organization
of primitive aristocracy ..’ (op. cit., 29). This explains why Plato hated tyranny,
perhaps even more than freedom: cp. Republic, 577c.—(See, however, note 69
to this chapter.) His passages on tyranny, especially 565-568, are a brilliant
sociological analysis of a consistent power-politics. I should like to call it the
first attempt towards a logic of power. (I chose this term in analogy to F. A. von
Hayek’s use of the term logic of choice for the pure economic theory.)—The
logic of power is fairly simple, and has often been applied in a masterly way.
The opposite kind of politics is much more difficult; partly because the logic of
anti-power politics, i.e. the logic of freedom, is hardly understood yet.
64
It is well known that most of Plato’s political proposals, including the
proposed communism of women and children, were ‘in the air’ in the Periclean
period. Cp. the excellent summary in Adam’s edition of the Republic, vol. I, p.
354 f., * and A. D. Winspear, The Genesis of Plato’s Thought, 1940.*
65
Cp. V. Pareto, Treatise on General Sociology, §1843 (English translation:
The Mind and Society, 1935, vol. III, pp. 1281); cp. note 1 to chapter 13, where
the passage is quoted more fully.
66
Cp. the effect which Glaucon’s presentation of Lycophron’s theory had
on Carneades (cp. note 54 to chapter 6), and later, on Hobbes. The professed
‘amorality’ of so many Marxists is also a case in point. Leftists frequently

believe in their own immorality. (This, although not much to the point, is
sometimes more modest and more pleasant than the dogmatic self-righteousness
of many reactionary moralists.)
67
Money is one of the symbols as well as one of the difficulties of the open
society. There is no doubt that we have not yet mastered the rational control of
its use; its greatest misuse is that it can buy political power. (The most direct
form of this misuse is the institution of the slave-market; but just this institution
is defended in Republic, 563b; cp. note 17 to chapter 4; and in the Laws, Plato is
not opposed to the political influence of wealth; cp. note 20 (1) to chapter 6.)
From the point of view of an individualistic society, money is fairly important. It
is part of the institution of the (partially) free market, which gives the consumer
some measure of control over production. Without some such institution, the
producer may control the market to such a degree that he ceases to produce for
the sake of consumption, while the consumer consumes largely for the sake of
production.—The sometimes glaring misuse of money has made us rather
sensitive, and Plato’s opposition between money and friendship is only the first
of many conscious or unconscious attempts to utilize these sentiments for the
purpose of political propaganda.
68
The group-spirit of tribalism is, of course, not entirely lost. It manifests
itself, for instance, in the most valuable experiences of friendship and
comradeship; also, in youthful tribalistic movements like the boy-scouts (or the
German Youth Movement), and in certain clubs and adult societies, as
described, for instance, by Sinclair Lewis in Babbitt. The importance of this
perhaps most universal of all emotional and aesthetic experiences must not be
underrated. Nearly all social movements, totalitarian as well as humanitarian,
are influenced by it. It plays an important role in war, and is one of the most
powerful weapons of the revolt against freedom; admittedly also in peace, and in
revolts against tyranny, but in these cases its humanitarianism is often
endangered by its romantic tendencies.—A conscious and not unsuccessful
attempt to revive it for the purpose of arresting society and of perpetuating a
class rule seems to have been the English Public School System. (‘No one can
grow up to be a good man unless his earliest years were given to noble games’ is
its motto, taken from Republic, 558b.)
Another product and symptom of the loss of the tribalistic group-spirit is, of
course, Plato’s emphasis upon the analogy between politics and medicine (cp.
chapter 8, especially note 4), an emphasis which expresses the feeling that the
body of society is sick, i.e. the feeling of strain, of drift. ‘From the time of Plato
on, the minds of political philosophers seem to have recurred to this comparison
between medicine and politics,’ says G. E. G. Catlin (A Study of the Principles
of Politics, 1930, note to 458, where Thomas Aquinas, G. Santayana, and Dean
Inge are quoted to support his statement; cp. also the quotations in op. cit., note
to 37, from Mill’s Logic). Catlin also speaks most characteristically (op. cit.,
459) of ‘harmony’ and of the ‘desire for protection, whether assured by the
mother or by society’. (Cp. also note 18 to chapter 5.)
69
Cp. chapter 7 (note 24 and text; see Athen., XI, 508) for the names of nine
such disciples of Plato (including the younger Dionysius and Dio). I suppose
that Plato’s repeated insistence upon the use, not only of force, but of
‘persuasion and force’ (cp. Laws, 722b, and notes 5, 10, and 18 to chapter 8),
was meant as a criticism of the tactics of the Thirty, whose propaganda was
indeed primitive. But this would imply that Plato was well aware of Pareto’s

recipe for utilizing sentiments instead of fighting them. That Plato’s friend Dio
(cp. note 25 to chapter 7) ruled Syracuse as a tyrant is admitted even by Meyer
in his defence of Dio whose fate he explains, in spite of his admiration for Plato
as a politician, by pointing out the ‘gulf between’ (the Platonic) ‘theory and
practice’ (op. cit., V, 999). Meyer says of Dio (loc. cit.), ‘The ideal king had
become, externally, indistinguishable from the contemptible tyrant.’ But he
believes that, internally as it were, Dio remained an idealist, and that he suffered
deeply when political necessity forced murder (especially that of his ally
Heraclides) and similar measures upon him. I think, however, that Dio acted
according to Plato’s theory; a theory which, by the logic of power, drove Plato
in the Laws to admit even the goodness of tyranny (709e, ff.; at the same place,
there may also be a suggestion that the debacle of the Thirty was due to their
great number: Critias alone would have been all right).
70
The tribal paradise is, of course, a myth (although some primitive people,
most of all the Eskimos, seem to be happy enough). There may have been no
sense of drift in the closed society, but there is ample evidence of other forms of
fear—fear of demoniac powers behind nature. The attempt to revive this fear,
and to use it against the intellectuals, the scientists, etc., characterizes many late
manifestations of the revolt against freedom. It is to the credit of Plato, the
disciple of Socrates, that it never occurred to him to present his enemies as the
offspring of the sinister demons of darkness. In this point, he remained
enlightened. He had little inclination to idealize the evil which was to him
simply debased, or degenerate, or impoverished goodness. (Only in one passage
in the Laws, 896e and 898c, there is what may be a suggestion of an abstract
idealization of the evil.)
71
A final note may be added here in connection with my remark on the
return to the beasts. Since the intrusion of Darwinism into the field of human
problems (an intrusion for which Darwin should not be blamed) there have been
many ‘social zoologists’ who have proved that the human race is bound to
degenerate physically, because insufficient physical competition, and the
possibility of protecting the body by the efforts of the mind, prevent natural
selection from acting upon our bodies. The first to formulate this idea (not that
he believed in it) was Samuel Butler, who wrote: ‘The one serious danger which
this writer’ (an Erewhonian writer) ‘apprehended was that the machines’ (and,
we may add, civilization in general) ‘would so .. lessen the severity of
competition, that many persons of inferior physique would escape detection and
transmit their inferiority to their descendants.’ (Erewhon, 1872; cp. Everyman’s
edition, p. 161.) The first as far as I know to write a bulky volume on this theme
was W. Schallmayer (cp. note 65 to chapter 12), one of the founders of modern
racialism. In fact, Butler’s theory has been continually rediscovered (especially
by ‘biological naturalists’ in the sense of chapter 5, above). According to some
modern writers (see, for example, G. H. Estabrooks, Man: The Mechanical
Misfit, 1941), man made the decisive mistake when he became civilized, and
especially when he began to help the weak; before this, he was an almost perfect
man-beast; but civilization, with its artificial methods of protecting the weak,
lead to degeneration, and therefore must ultimately destroy itself. In reply to
such arguments, we should, I think, first admit that man is likely to disappear
one day from this world; but we should add that this is also true of even the most
perfect beasts, to say nothing of those which are only ‘almost perfect’. The
theory that the human race might live a little longer if it had not made the fatal

mistake of helping the weak is most questionable; but even if it were true—is
mere length of survival of the race really all we want? Or is the almost perfect
man-beast so eminently valuable that we should prefer a prolongation of his
existence (he did exist for quite a long time, anyway) to our experiment of
helping the weak?
Mankind, I believe, has not done so badly. In spite of the treason of some of
its intellectual leaders, in spite of the stupefying effects of Platonic methods in
education and the devastating results of propaganda, there have been some
surprising successes. Many weak men have been helped, and for nearly a
hundred years slavery has been practically abolished. Some say it will soon be
re-introduced. I feel more optimistic; and, after all, it will depend on ourselves.
But even if all this should be lost again, and even if we had to return to the
almost perfect man-beast, this would not alter the IO/NOTE fact that once upon a
time (even if the time was short), slavery did disappear from the face of the
earth, This achievement and its memory may, I believe, compensate some of us
for all our misfits, mechanical or otherwise; and it may even compensate some
of us for the fatal mistake made by our forefathers when they missed the golden
opportunity of arresting all change—of returning to the cage of the closed
society and establishing, for ever and ever, a perfect zoo of almost perfect
monkeys.

Notes To Chapter 11
1

That Aristotle’s criticism of Plato is very frequently, and in important
places, unmerited, has been admitted by many students of the history of
philosophy. It is one of the few points in which even the admirers of Aristotle
find it difficult to defend him, since usually they are admirers of Plato as well.
Zeller, to quote just one example, comments (cp. Aristotle and the Earlier
Peripatetics, English translation by Costelloe and Muirhead, 1897, II, 261, n. 2),
upon the distribution of land in Aristotle’s Best State: ‘There is a similar plan in
Plato’s Laws, 7450 seqq.; Aristotle, however, in Politics 1265b24 considers
Plato’s arrangement, merely on account of a trifling difference, highly
objectionable.” A similar remark is made by G. Grote, Aristotle (Ch. XIV, end
of second paragraph). In view of many criticisms of Plato which strongly
suggest that envy of Plato’s originality is part of his motive, Aristotle’s muchadmired solemn assurance (Nicomachean Ethics, I, 6, 1) that the sacred duty of
giving preference to truth forces him to sacrifice even what is most dear to him,
namely, his love for Plato, sounds to me somewhat hypocritical.
2
Cp. Th. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers (I am quoting from the German Edition,
III, 298, i.e. Book 7, Ch. 31, § 6). See especially Aristotle’s Politics, 1313a.—
G. C. Field (in Plato and His Contemporaries, 114f.) defends Plato and
Aristotle against the ‘reproach .. that, with the possibility, and, in the case of the
latter, the actuality of this’ (i.e. the Macedonian conquest) ‘before their eyes,
they .. say nothing of these new developments’. But Field’s defence (perhaps
directed against Gomperz) is unsuccessful, in spite of his strong comments upon
those who make such a reproach. (Field says: ‘this criticism betrays .. a singular
lack of understanding.’) Of course, it is correct to claim, as Field does, ‘that a
hegemony like that exercised by Macedon .. was no new thing’; but Macedon
was in Plato’s eyes at least half-barbarian and therefore a natural enemy. Field is
also right in saying that ‘the destruction of independence by Macedon’ was not a

complete one; but did Plato or Aristotle foresee that it was not to become
complete? I believe that a defence like Field’s cannot possibly succeed, simply
because it would have to prove too much; namely, that the significance of
Macedon’s threat could not have been clear, at the time, to any observer; but this
is disproved, of course, by the example of Demosthenes. The question is: why
did Plato, who like Isocrates had taken some interest in pan-Hellenic nationalism
(cp. notes 48-50 to chapter 8, Rep., 470, and the Eighth Letter, 353e, which
Field claims to be ‘certainly genuine’) and who was apprehensive of a
‘Phoenician and Oscan’ threat to Syracuse, why did he ignore Macedon’s threat
to Athens? A likely reply to the corresponding question concerning Aristotle is:
because he belonged to the pro-Macedonian party. A reply in Plato’s case is
suggested by Zeller (op. cit., II, 41) in his defence of Aristotle’s right to support
Macedon: ‘So satisfied was Plato of the intolerable character of the existing
political position that he advocated sweeping changes.’ (‘Plato’s follower’,
Zeller continues, referring to Aristotle, ‘could the less evade the same
convictions, since he had a keener insight into men and things ..’) In other
words, the answer might be that Plato’s hatred of Athenian democracy exceeded
so much even his pan-Hellenic nationalism that he was, like Isocrates, looking
forward to the Macedonian conquest.
3
This and the following three quotations are from Aristotle’s Politics,
1254b-1255a; 1254a; 1255a; 1260a.—See also: 1252a, f. (I, 2, 2-5); 1253b, ff.
(I, 4, 386, and especially I, 5); 1313b (V, II, II). Furthermore: Metaphysics,
1075a, where freemen and slaves are also opposed ‘by nature’. But we find also
the passage: ‘Some slaves have the souls of freemen, and others their bodies’
(Politics, 1254b). Cp. with Plato’s Timaeus, 51e, quoted in note 50 (2), to
chapter 8.—For a trifling mitigation, and a typically ‘balanced judgement’ of
Plato’s Laws, see Politics, 1260b: ‘Those’ (this is a somewhat typical
Aristotelian way of referring to Plato) ‘are wrong who forbid us even to
converse with slaves and say that we should only use the language of command;
for slaves must be admonished’ (Plato had said, in Laws, 777e, that they should
not be admonished) ‘even more than children.” Zeller, in his long list of the
personal virtues of Aristotle (op. cit., I, 44), mentions his ‘nobility of principles’
and his ‘benevolence to slaves’. I cannot help remembering the perhaps less
noble but certainly more benevolent principle put forward much earlier by
Alcidamas and Lycophron, namely, that there should be no slaves at all. W. D.
Ross (Aristotle, 2nd ed., 1930, pp. 241 ff.) defends Aristotle’s attitude towards
slavery by saying: ‘Where to us he seems reactionary, he may have seemed
revolutionary to them’, viz., to his contemporaries. In support of this view, Ross
mentions Aristotle’s doctrine that Greek should not enslave Greek. But this
doctrine was hardly very revolutionary since Plato had taught it, probably half a
century before Aristotle. And that Aristotle’s views were indeed reactionary can
be best seen from the fact that he repeatedly finds it necessary to defend them
against the doctrine that no man is a slave by nature, and further from his own
testimony to the anti-slavery tendencies of the Athenian democracy.
An excellent statement on Aristotle’s Politics can be found in the beginning
of Chapter XIV of G. Grote’s Aristotle, from which I quote a few sentences:
‘The scheme .. of government proposed by Aristotle, in the two last books of his
Politics, as representing his own ideas of something like perfection, is evidently
founded upon the Republic of Plato: from whom he differs in the important
circumstance of not admitting either community of property or community of

wives and children. Each of these philosophers recognizes one separate class of
inhabitants, relieved from all private toil and all money-getting employments,
and constituting exclusively the citizens of the commonwealth. This small class
is in effect the city—the commonwealth: the remaining inhabitants are not a part
of the commonwealth, they are only appendages to it—indispensable indeed, but
still appendages, in the same manner as slaves or cattle.’ Grote recognizes that
Aristotle’s Best State, where it deviates from the Republic, largely copies Plato’s
Laws. Aristotle’s dependence upon Plato is prominent even where he expresses
his acquiescence in the victory of democracy; cp. especially Politics, III, 15; 1113; 1286b (a parallel passage is IV, 13; 10; 1297b). The passage ends by saying
of democracy: ‘No other form of government appears to be possible any longer’;
but this result is reached by an argument that follows very closely Plato’s story
of the decline and fall of the state in Books VIII-IX of the Republic; and this in
spite of the fact that Aristotle criticizes Plato’s story severely (for instance in V,
12; 1316a, f.).
4
Aristotle’s use of the word ‘banausic’ in the sense of ‘professional’ or
‘money earning’ is clearly shown in Politics, VIII, 6, 3 ff. (1340b) and
especially 15 f. (1341b). Every professional, for example a flute player, and of
course every 3rtisan or labourer, is ‘banausic’, that is to say, not a free man, not
a citizen, even though he is not a real slave; the status of a ‘banausic’ man is one
of ‘partial or limited slavery’ (Politics, I, 14; 13; 1260a/b). The word ‘banausos’
derives, I gather, from a pre-Hellenic word for ‘fire-worker’. Used as an
attribute it means that a man’s origin and caste ‘disqualify him from prowess in
the field’. (Cp. Greenidge, quoted by Adam in his edition of the Republic, note
to 495630.) It may be translated by ‘low-caste’, ‘cringing’, ‘degrading’, or in
some contexts by ‘upstart’. Plato used the word in the same sense as Aristotle. In
the Laws (7416 and 743d), the term ‘banausia’ is used to describe the depraved
state of a man who makes money by means other than the hereditary possession
of land. See also the Republic, 4956 and 590c. But if we remember the tradition
that Socrates was a mason; and Xenophon’s story (Mem. II, 7); and Antisthenes’
praise of hard work; and the attitude of the Cynics; then it seems unlikely that
Socrates agreed with the aristocratic prejudice that money earning must be
degrading. (The Oxford English Dictionary proposes to render ‘banausic’ as
‘merely mechanical, proper to a mechanic’, and quotes Grote, Eth. Fragm., vi,
227 = Aristotle, and ed., 1880, p. 545; but this rendering is much too narrow,
and Grote’s passage does not justify this interpretation, which may originally
rest upon a misunderstanding of Plutarch. It is interesting that in Shakespeare’s
Midsummer Night’s Dream the term ‘mere mechanicals’ is used precisely in the
sense of ‘banausic’ men; and this use might well be connected with a passage on
Archimedes in North’s translation of the Life of Marcellus.)
In Mind, vol. 47, there is an interesting discussion between A. E. Taylor and
F. M. Cornford, in which the former (pp. 197 ff.) defends his view that Plato,
when speaking of ‘the god’ in a certain passage of the Timaeus, may have had in
mind a ‘peasant cultivator’ who ‘serves’ by bodily labour; a view which is, I
think most convincingly, criticized by Cornford (pp. 329 ff.). Plato’s attitude
towards all ‘banausic’ work, and especially manual labour, bears on this
problem; and when (p. 198, note) Taylor uses the argument that Plato compares
his gods ‘with shepherds or sheep-dogs in charge of a flock of sheep’ (Laws,
901e, 907a), then we could point out that the activities of nomads and hunters
are quite consistently considered by Plato as noble or even divine; but the

sedentary ‘peasant cultivator’ is banausic and depraved. Cp. note 32 to chapter
4, and text.
5
The two passages that follow are from Politics (1337b, 4 and 5).
6
The 1939 edition of the Pocket Oxford Dictionary still says: ‘liberal .. (of
education) fit for a gentleman, of a general literary rather than technical kind’.
This shows most clearly the everlasting power of Aristotle’s influence.
I admit that there is a serious problem of a professional education, that of
narrow-mindedness. But I do not believe that a ‘literary’ education is the
remedy; for it may create its own peculiar kind of narrow-mindedness, its
peculiar snobbery. And in our day no man should be considered educated if he
does not take an interest in science. The usual defence that an interest in
electricity or stratigraphy need not be more enlightening than an interest in
human affairs only betrays a complete lack of understanding of human affairs.
For science is not merely a collection of facts about electricity, etc.; it is one of
the most important spiritual movements of our day. Anybody who does not
attempt to acquire an understanding of this movement cuts himself off from the
most remarkable development in the history of human affairs. Our so-called Arts
Faculties, based upon the theory that by means of a literary and historical
education they introduce the student into the spiritual life of man, have therefore
become obsolete in their present form. There can be no history of man which
excludes a history of his intellectual struggles and achievements; and there can
be no history of ideas which excludes the history of scientific ideas. But literary
education has an even more serious aspect. Not only does it fail to educate the
student, who is often to become a teacher, to an understanding of the greatest
spiritual movement of his own day, but it also often fails to educate him to
intellectual honesty. Only if the student experiences how easy it is to err, and
how hard to make even a small advance in the field of knowledge, only then can
he obtain a feeling for the standards of intellectual honesty, a respect for truth,
and a disregard of authority and bumptiousness. But nothing is more necessary
to-day than the spread of these modest intellectual virtues. ‘The mental power’,
T. H. Huxley wrote in A Liberal Education, ‘which will be of most importance
in your .. life will be the power of seeing things as they are without regard to
authority ... But at school and at college, you shall know of no source of truth
but authority.’ I admit that, unfortunately, this is true also of many courses in
science, which by some teachers is still treated as if it was a ‘body of
knowledge’, as the ancient phrase goes. But this idea will one day, I hope,
disappear; for science can be taught as a fascinating part of human history—as a
quickly developing growth of bold hypotheses, controlled by experiment, and by
criticism. Taught in this way, as a part of the history of ‘natural philosophy’, and
of the history of problems and of ideas, it could become the basis of a new
liberal University education; of one whose aim, where it cannot produce experts,
will be to produce at least men who can distinguish between a charlatan and an
expert. This modest and liberal aim will be far beyond anything that our Arts
faculties nowadays achieve.
7
Politics, VIII, 3, 2 (1337b): ‘I must repeat over and again, that the first
principle of all action is leisure.’ Previously, in VII, 15, I f. (13343), we read:
‘Since the end of individuals and of states is the same .. they should both contain
the virtues of leisure ... For the proverb says truly, “There is no leisure for
slaves”.’ Cp. also the reference in note 9 to this section, and Metaphysics,
1072b23.

Concerning Aristotle’s ‘admiration and deference for the leisured classes’,
cp. for example the following passage from the Politics, IV, (VII), 8, 4-5
(1293b/1294a): ‘Birth and education as a rule go together with wealth ... The
rich are already in possession of those advantages the want of which is a
temptation to crime, and hence they are called noblemen and gentlemen. Now it
appears to be impossible that a state should be badly governed if the best
citizens rule ..’ Aristotle, however, not only admires the rich, but is also, like
Plato, a racialist (cp. op. cit., III 13, 2-3, 12833): ‘The nobly born are citizens in
a truer sense of the word than the low born ... Those who come from better
ancestors are likely to be better men, for nobility is excellence of race.’
8
Cp. Th. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers. (I am quoting from the German
edition, vol. III, 263, i.e. book 6, ch. 27, § 7.)
9
Cp. Nicomachean Ethics, X, 7, 6. The Aristotelian phrase, ‘the good life’,
seems to have caught the imagination of many modern admirers who associate
with this phrase something like a ‘good life’ in the Christian sense—a life
devoted to help, service, and the quest for the ‘higher values’. But this
interpretation is the result of a mistaken idealization of Aristotle’s intentions;
Aristotle was exclusively concerned with the ‘good life’ of feudal gentlemen,
and this ‘good life’ he did not envisage as a life of good deeds, but as a life of
refined leisure, spent in the pleasant company of friends who are equally well
situated.
10
I do not think that even the term ‘vulgarization’ would be too strong,
considering that to Aristotle himself ‘professional’ means ‘vulgar’, and
considering that he certainly made a profession of Platonic philosophy. Besides,
he made it dull, as even Zeller admits in the midst of his eulogy (op. cit., I, 46):
‘He cannot inspire us .. at all in the same way as Plato does. His work is drier,
more professional. . than Plato’s has been.’
11
Plato presented in the Timaeus (42a f., 90e f., and especially 91d f.; see
note 6 (7) to chapter 3) a general theory of the origin of species by way of
degeneration, down from the Gods and the first man. Man first degenerates into
a woman, then further to the higher and lower animals and to the plants. It is, as
Gomperz says (Greek Thinkers, book 5, ch. 19, § 3; I am quoting from the
German edition, vol. II, 482), ‘a theory of descent in the literal sense or a theory
of devolution, as opposed to the modern theory of evolution which, since it
assumes an ascending sequence, might be called a theory of ascent.’ Plato’s
mythical and possibly semi-ironical presentation of ‘this theory of descent by
degeneration makes use of the Orphic and Pythagorean theory of the
transmigration of the soul. All this (and the important fact that evolutionary
theories which made the lower forms precede the higher were in vogue at least
as early as Empedocles) must be remembered when we hear from Aristotle that
Speusippus, together with certain Pythagoreans, believed in an evolutionary
theory according to which the best and most divine, which are first in rank,
come last in the chronological order of development. Aristotle speaks (Met.,
1072b30) of ‘those who suppose, with the Pythagoreans and Speusippus, that
supreme beauty and goodness are not present in the beginning’. From this
passage we may conclude, perhaps, that some Pythagoreans had used the myth
of transmigration (possibly under the influence of Xenophanes) as the vehicle of
a ‘theory of ascent’. This surmise is supported by Aristotle, who says (Met.,
1091a34): ‘The mythologists seem to agree with some thinkers of the present
day’ (an allusion, I suppose, to Speusippus) ‘.. who say that the good as well as

the beautiful make their appearance in nature only after nature has made some
progress.’ It also seems as if Speusippus had taught that the world will in the
course of its development become a Parmenidian One—an organized and fully
harmonious whole. (Cp. Met., 1092314, where a thinker who maintains that the
more perfect always comes from the imperfect, is quoted as saying that ‘the One
itself does not yet exist’; cp. also Met., 1091a11.) Aristotle himself consistently
expresses, 3t the places quoted, his opposition to these ‘theories of ascent’. His
argument is that it is a complete man that produces man, and that the incomplete
seed is not prior to man. In view of this attitude, Zeller can hardly be right in
attributing to Aristotle what is practically the Speusippian theory. (Cp. Zeller,
Aristotle, etc., vol. II, 28 f. A similar interpretation is propounded by H. F.
Osborn, From the Greeks to Darwin, 1908, pp. 48-56.) We may have to accept
Gomperz’s interpretation, according to which Aristotle taught the eternity and
invariability of the human species and at least of the higher animals. Thus his
morphological orders must be interpreted as neither chronological nor
genealogical. (Cp. Greek Thinkers, book 6, ch. 11, § 10, and especially ch. 13, §
6 f, and the notes to these passages.) But there remains, of course, the possibility
that Aristotle was inconsistent in this point, as he was in many others, and that
his arguments against Speusippus 3re due to his wish to assert his independence.
See also note 6 (7) to chapter 3, and notes 2 and 4 to chapter 4.
12
Aristotle’s First Mover, that is, God, is prior in time (though he is eternal)
and has the predicate of goodness. For the evidence concerning the identification
of formal and final cause mentioned in this paragraph, see note 15 to this
chapter.
13
For Plato’s biological teleology see Timaeus, 733-766. Gomperz
comments rightly (Greek Thinkers, book 5, ch. 19, § 7; German ed., vol. II, 495
f.) that Plato’s teleology is only understandable if we remember that ‘animals
are degenerate men, and that their organization may therefore exhibit purposes
which were originally only the ends of man’.
14
For Plato’s version of the theory of the natural places, see Timaeus, 60b63b, and especially 63b f. Aristotle adopts the theory with only minor changes
and explains like Plato the ‘lightness’ and ‘heaviness’ of bodies by the ‘upward’
and ‘downward’ direction of their natural movements towards their natural
places; cp. for instance Physics, 192b13; also Metaphysics, 1065b10.
15
Aristotle is not always quite definite and consistent in his statements on
this problem. Thus he writes in the Metaphysics (1044335): ‘What is the formal
cause (of man)? His Essence. The final cause? His end. But perhaps these two
are the same.’ In other parts of the same work he seems to be more assured of
the identity between the Form and the end of a change or movement. Thus we
read (1069b/1070a): ‘Everything that changes .. is changed by something into
something. That by which it is changed is the immediate mover; . . that into
which it is changed, the Form.’ And later (10703, 9/10): ‘There are three kinds
of substance: first, matter. .; secondly, the nature towards which it moves; and
thirdly, the particular substance which is composed of these two.’ Now since
what is here called ‘nature’ is as a rule called ‘Form’ by Aristotle, and since it is
here described as an end of movement, we have: Form = end.
16
For the doctrine that movement is the realization or actualization of
potentialities, see for instance Metaphysics, Book IX; or 1065b17, where the
term ‘buildable’ is used to describe a definite potentiality of a prospective house:
‘When the “buildable”. . actually exists, then it is being built; and this is the

process of building.’ Cp. also Aristotle’s Physics, 201b4 f.; furthermore, see
Gomperz, op. cit., book 6, ch. 11, § 5.
17
Cp. Metaphysics, 1049b5. See further Book V, ch. IV, and especially
1015a12 f., Book VII, ch. IV, especially 1029b15.
18
For the definition of the soul as the First Entelechy, see the reference
given by Zeller, op. cit., vol. II, p. 3, n. 1. For the meaning of Entelechy as
formal cause, see op. cit., vol. I, 379, note 2. Aristotle’s use of this term is
anything but precise. (See also Met., 1035b15.) Cp. also note 19 to chapter 5,
and text.
19
For this and the next quotation see Zeller, op. cit., I, 46.
20
Cp. Politics, II, 8, 21 (12693), with its references to Plato’s various Myths
of the Earthborn (Rep., 414c; Pol., 271a; Tim., 22c; Laws, 677a).
21
Cp. Hegel, Lectures on the Philosophy of History, transl. by J. Sibree,
London 1914, Introduction, 23; see also Loewenberg’s Hegel—Selections (The
Modern Student’s Library), 366.—The whole Introduction, especially this and
the following pages, shows clearly Hegel’s dependence upon Aristotle. That
Hegel was aware of it is shown by the way in which he alluded to Aristotle on p.
59 (Loewenberg’s edition, 412).
22
Hegel, op. cit., 23 (Loewenberg’s edition, 365).
23
Cp. Caird, Hegel (Blackwood 1911), 26 f.
24
The next quotations are from the place referred to in notes 21 and 22.
25
For the following remarks, see Hegel’s Philosophical Propaedeutics, 2nd
Year, Phenomenology of the Spirit. Transl. by W. T. Harris (Loewenberg’s
edition, 68 ff). I deviate slightly from this translation. My remarks allude to the
following interesting passages: § 23: ‘The impulse of self-consciousness’ (‘selfconsciousness’ in German means also self-assertion; cp. the end of chapter 16)
‘consists in this: to realize its .. “true nature”... It is therefore .. active .. in
asserting itself externally ..’ § 24: ‘Self-consciousness has in its culture, or
movement, three stages:... (2) in so far as it is related to another self ..: the
relation of master and slave (domination and servitude).’ Hegel does not
mention any other ‘relation to another self.—We read further: ‘(3) The Relation
of Master and Slave ... § 32: In order to assert itself as free being and to obtain
recognition as such, self-consciousness must exhibit itself to another self ... §
33:.. With the reciprocal demand for recognition there enters .. the relation of
master and slave between them .. § 34: Since .. each must strive to assert and
prove himself .. the one who prefers life to freedom enters into a condition of
slavery, thereby showing that he has not the capacity’ (‘nature’ would have been
Aristotle’s or Plato’s expression) ‘.. for his independence ... § 35:.. The one who
serves is devoid of selfhood and has another self in place of his own ... The
master, on the contrary, looks upon the servant as reduced, and upon his own
individual will as preserved and elevated .. § 36: The individual will of the
servant .. is cancelled in his fear of the master ..’ etc. It is difficult to overlook an
element of hysteria in this theory of human relations and their reduction to
mastership and servitude. I hardly doubt that Hegel’s method of burying his
thoughts under heaps of words, which one must remove in order to get to his
meaning (as a comparison between my various quotations and the original may
show) is one of the symptoms of his hysteria; it is a kind of escape, a way of
shunning the daylight. I do not doubt that this method of his would make as
excellent an object for psycho-analysis as his wild dreams of domination and
submission. (It must be mentioned that Hegel’s dialectics—see the next

chapter—carries him, at the end of § 36 here quoted, beyond the master-slave
relation ‘to the universal will, the transition to positive freedom’. As will be seen
from chapter 12 (especially sections II and IV), these terms are just euphemisms
for the totalitarian state. Thus, mastership and servitude are very appropriately
‘reduced to components’ of totalitarianism.)
With Hegel’s remark quoted here (cp. § 35) that the slave is the man who
prefers life to freedom, compare Plato’s remark (Republic, 3873) that free men
are those who fear slavery more than death. In a sense, this is true enough; those
who are not prepared to fight for their freedom will lose it. But the theory which
is implied by both Plato and Hegel, and which is very popular with later authors
also, is that men who give in to superior force, or who do not die rather than
give in to an armed gangster, are, by nature, ‘born slaves’ who do not deserve to
fare better. This theory, I assert, can be held only by the most violent enemies of
civilization.
26
For a criticism of Wittgenstein’s view that, while science investigates
matters of fact, the business of philosophy is the clarification of meaning, see
notes 46 and especially 51 and 52 to this chapter. (Cp. further, H. Gomperz, The
Meanings of Meaning, in Philosophy of Science, vol. 8, 1941, especially p. 183.)
For the whole problem to which this digression (down to note 54 to this
chapter) is devoted, viz. the problem of methodological essentialism versus
methodological nominalism, cp. notes 27-30 to chapter 3, and text; see further
especially note 38 to the present chapter.
27
For Plato’s, or rather Parmenides’, distinction between knowledge and
opinion (a distinction which continued to be popular with more modern writers,
for example with Locke and Hobbes), see notes 22 and 26 to chapter 3, and text;
further, notes 19 to chapter 5, and 25-27 to chapter 8. For Aristotle’s
corresponding distinction, cp. for example Metaphysics 1039b31 and Anal.
Post., I, 33 (88b30 ff.); II, 19 (100b5).
For Aristotle’s distinction between demonstrative and intuitive knowledge,
see the last chapter of the Anal. Post. (II, 19, especially 100b 5-17; see also 72b
18-24, 75b31, 84a31, 90a6-91a11.) For the connection between demonstrative
knowledge and the ‘causes’ of a thing which are ‘distinct from its essential
nature’ and thereby require a middle term, see op. cit., II, 8 (especially 93a5,
93b26). For the analogous connection between intellectual intuition and the
‘indivisible form’ which it grasps—the indivisible essence and individual nature
which is identical with its cause—see op. cit., 72b24, 77a4, 85a1, 88b35. See
also op. cit., 93b21: ‘To know the nature of a thing is to know the reason why it
is’ (i.e. its cause); and 93b21: ‘There are essential natures which are immediate,
i.e. basic premises.’
For Aristotle’s recognition that we must stop somewhere in the regression
of proofs or demonstrations, and accept certain principles without proof, see for
example Metaphysics, 1006a7: ‘It is impossible to prove everything, for then
there would arise an infinite regression ..’ See also Anal. Post., II, 3 (90b, 1827).
I may mention that my analysis of Aristotle’s theory of definition agrees
largely with that of Grote, but partly disagrees with that of Ross. The very great
difference between the interpretations of these two writers may be just indicated
by two quotations, both taken from chapters devoted to the analysis of
Aristotle’s Anal. Post., Book II. ‘In the second book, Aristotle turns to consider
demonstration as the instrument whereby definition is reached.’ (Ross, Aristotle,

2nd ed., p. 49.) This may be contrasted with: ‘The Definition can never be
demonstrated, for it declares only the essence of the subject ..; whereas
Demonstration assumes the essence to be known ..’ (Grote, Aristotle, 2nd ed.,
241; see also 240/241. Cp. also end of note 29 below.)
28
Cp. Aristotle’s Metaphysics, 1031b7 and 1031b20. See also 996b20: ‘We
have knowledge of a thing if we know its essence.’
29
‘A definition is a statement that describes the essence of a thing’
(Aristotle, Topics, I, 5, 101b36; VII, 3, 153a, 153a15, etc. See also Met.,
1042a17)—’ The definition. . reveals the essential nature.” (Anal. Post., II, 3.,
91a1).—’ Definition is .. a statement of the nature of the thing’ (93b28).—’
Only those things have essences whose formulae are definitions.” (Met., 1030a5
f.)—’ The essence, whose formula is a definition, is also called the substance of
a thing.’ (Met., 1017b21)—’ Clearly, then, the definition is the formula of the
essence. .’ (Met., 1031a13).
Regarding the principles, i.e. the starting points or basic premises of proofs,
we must distinguish between two kinds, (1) The logical principles (cp. Met.,
996b25 ff.) and (2) the premises from which proofs must proceed and which
cannot be proven in turn if an infinite regression is to be avoided (cp. note 27 to
this chapter). The latter are definitions: ‘The basic premises of proofs are
definitions’ (Anal. Post., II, 3., 90b23; cp. 89a17, 90a35, 90b23). See also Ross,
Aristotle, p. 45/46, commenting upon Anal. Post., I, 4., 20-74a4: ‘The premises
of science’, Ross writes (p. 46), ‘will, we are told, be per se in either sense (a) or
sense (b).’ On the previous page we learn that a premise is necessary per se (or
essentially necessary) on the senses (a) and (b) if it rests upon a definition.
30
‘If it has a name, then there will be a formula of its meaning’, says
Aristotle (Met., 1030a14; see also 1030b24); and he explains that not every
formula of the meaning of a name is a definition; but if the name is one of a
species of a genus, then the formula will be a definition.
It is important to note that in my use (I follow here the modern use of the
word) ‘definition’ always refers to the whole definition sentence, while Aristotle
(and others who follow him in this, e.g. Hobbes) sometimes uses the word also
as a synonym for ‘definiens’.
Definitions are not of particulars, but only of universals (cp. Met., 1036a28)
and only of essences, i.e. of something which is the species of a genus (i.e. a last
differentia; cp. Met., 1038a19) and an indivisible form, see also Anal. Post. II,
13., 97b6 f.
31
That Aristotle’s treatment is not very lucid may be seen from the end of
note 27 to this chapter, and from a further comparison of these two
interpretations. The greatest obscurity is in Aristotle’s ‘treatment of the way in
which, by a process of induction, we rise to definitions that are principles; cp.
especially Anal. Post., II, 19, pp. 100a f.
32
For Plato’s doctrine, see notes 25-27 to chapter 8, and text. Grote writes
(Aristotle, 2nd ed., 260): ‘Aristotle had inherited from Plato his doctrine of an
infallible Nous or Intellect, enjoying complete immunity from error.’ Grote
continues to emphasize that, as opposed to Plato, Aristotle does not despise
observational experience, but rather assigns to his Nous (i.e. intellectual
intuition) ‘a position as terminus and correlate to the process of Induction’ (loc.
cit., see also op. cit., p. 577). This is so; but observational experience has
apparently only the function of priming and developing our intellectual intuition

for its task, the intuition of the universal essence; and, indeed, nobody has ever
explained how definitions, which are beyond error, can be reached by induction.
33
Aristotle’s view amounts to the same as Plato’s in so far as there is for
both, in the last instance, no possible appeal to argument. All that can be done is
to assert dogmatically of a certain definition that it is a true description of its
essence; and if asked why this and no other description is true, all that remains is
an appeal to the ‘intuition of the essence’.
Aristotle speaks of induction in at least two senses—in a more heuristic
sense of a method leading us to ‘intuit the general principle’ (cp. An. Pri.,
67a22f., 27b25-33, An. Post., 71a7, 81a38-b5, 100b4 f.) and in a more empirical
sense (cp. An. Pri., 68b15-37, 69a16, An. Post., 78a35, 81b5 ff., Topics, 105a13,
156a4, 157a34).
A case of an apparent contradiction, which, however, might be cleared up,
is 77a4, where we read that a definition is neither universal nor particular. I
suggest that the solution is not that a definition is ‘not strictly a judgement at all’
(as G. R. G. Mure suggests in the Oxford translation), but that it is not simply
universal but ‘commensurate’, i.e. universal and necessary. (Cp. 73b26, 96b4,
97b25.)
For the ‘argument’ of Anal. Post, mentioned in the text, see 100b6 ff. For
the mystical union of the knowing and the known in De Anima, see especially
425b30 f., 430a20, 431a1; the decisive passage for our purpose is 430b27 f.:
‘The intuitive grasp of the definition .. of the essence is never in error .. just as ..
the seeing of the special object of sight can never be in error.” For the
theological passages of the Metaphysics, see especially 1072b20 (‘contact’) and
1075a2. See also notes 59 (2) to chapter 10, 36 to chapter 12, and notes 3, 4, 6,
29-32, and 58 to chapter 24.
For ‘the whole body of fact’ mentioned in the next paragraph, see the end of
Anal. Post. (100b15 f.).
It is remarkable how similar the views of Hobbes (a nominalist but not a
methodological nominalist) are to Aristotle’s methodological essentialism.
Hobbes too believes that definitions are the basic premises of all knowledge (as
opposed to opinion).
34
I have developed this view of scientific method in my Logic of Scientific
Discovery; see, e.g. pp. 278 ff. and pp. 315 ff., for a fuller translation from
Erkenntnis, vol. 5 (1934) where I say: ‘We shall have to get accustomed to
interpreting sciences as systems of hypotheses (instead of “bodies of
knowledge”), i.e. of anticipations that cannot be established, but which we use
as long as they are corroborated, and of which we are not entitled to say that
they are “true” or “more or less certain” or even “probable”.’
35
The quotation is from my note in Erkenntnis, vol. 3 (1933), now retranslated in The Logic of Scientific Discovery, pp. 312 ff.; it is a variation and
generalization of a statement on geometry made by Einstein in his Geometry and
Experience.
36
It is, of course, not possible to estimate whether theories, argument, and
reasoning, or else observation and experiment, are of greater significance for
science; for science is always theory tested by observation and experiment. But
it is certain that all those ‘positivists’ who try to show that science is the ‘sum
total of our observations’, or that it is observational rather than theoretical, are
quite mistaken. The role of theory and argument in science can hardly be

overrated.—Concerning the relation between proof and logical argument in
general, see note 47 to this chapter.
37
Cp. e.g. Met., 1030a, 6 and 14 (see note 30 to this chapter).
38
I wish to emphasize that I speak here about nominalism versus
essentialism in a purely methodological way. I do not take up any position
towards the metaphysical problem of universals, i.e. towards the metaphysical
problem of nominalism versus essentialism (a term which I suggest should be
used instead of the traditional term ‘realism’); and I certainly do not advocate a
metaphysical nominalism, although I advocate a methodological nominalism.
(See also notes 27 and 30 to chapter 3.)
The opposition between nominalist and essentialist definitions made in the
text is an attempt to reconstruct the traditional distinction between ‘verbal’ and
‘real’ definitions. My main emphasis, however, is on the question whether the
definition is read from the right to the left or from the left to the right; or, in
other words, whether it replaces a long story by a short one, or a short story by
a long one.
39
My contention that in science only nominalist definitions occur (I speak
here of explicit definitions only and neither of implicit nor of recursive
definitions) needs some defence. It certainly does not imply that terms are not
used more or less ‘intuitively’ in science; this is clear if only we consider that all
chains of definitions must start with undefined terms, whose meaning can be
exemplified but not defined. Further, it seems clear that in science, especially in
mathematics, we often first use a term, for instance ‘dimension’ or ‘truth’,
intuitively, but proceed later to define it. But this is a rather rough description of
the situation. A more precise description would be this. Some of the undefined
terms used intuitively can be sometimes replaced by defined terms of which it
can be shown that they fulfil the intentions with which the undefined terms have
been used; that is to say, to every sentence in which the undefined terms
occurred (e.g. which was interpreted as analytic) there is a corresponding
sentence in which the newly defined term occurs (which follows from the
definition).
One certainly can say that K. Menger has recursively defined ‘Dimension’
or that A. Tarski has defined ‘Truth’; but this way of expressing matters may
lead to misunderstandings. What has happened is that Menger gave a purely
nominal definition of classes of sets of points which he labelled ‘n-dimensional’,
because it was possible to replace the intuitive mathematical concept ‘ndimensional’ by the new concept in all important contexts; and the same can be
said of Tarski’s concept ‘Truth’. Tarski gave a nominal definition (or rather a
method of drafting nominal definitions) which he labelled ‘Truth’, since a
system of sentences could be derived from the definition corresponding to those
sentences (like the law of the excluded middle) which had been used by many
logicians and philosophers in connection with what they called ‘Truth’.
40
If anything, our language would gain precision if we were to avoid
definitions and take the immense trouble of always using the defining terms
instead of the defined terms. For there is a source of imprecision in the current
methods of definition: Carnap has developed (in 1934) what appears to be the
first method of avoiding inconsistencies in a language using definitions. Cp.
Logical Syntax of Language, 1937, § 22, p. 67. (See also Hilbert-Bernays,
Grundlagen d. Math., 1939, II, p. 295, note 1.) Carnap has shown that in most
cases a language admitting definitions will be inconsistent even if the definitions

satisfy the general rules for forming definitions. The comparative practical
unimportance of this inconsistency merely rests upon the fact that we can always
eliminate the defined terms, replacing them by the defining terms.
41
Several examples of this method of introducing the new term only after
the need has arisen may be found in the present book. Dealing, as it does, with
philosophical positions, it can hardly avoid introducing, for the sake of brevity,
names for these positions. This is the reason why I have to make use of so many
‘isms’. But in many cases these names are introduced only after the positions in
question have been described.
42
In a more systematic criticism of the essentialist method, three problems
might be distinguished which essentialism can neither escape nor solve (1) The
problem of distinguishing clearly between a mere verbal convention and an
essentialist definition which ‘truly’ describes an essence. (2) The problem of
distinguishing ‘true’ essential definitions from ‘false’ ones. (3) The problem of
avoiding an infinite regression of definitions.—I shall briefly deal with the
second and third of these problems only. The third of these problems will be
dealt with in the text; for the second, see notes 44 (1) and 54 to this chapter.
43
The fact that a statement is true may sometimes help to explain why it
appears to us as self-evident. This is the case with ‘2 + 2 = 4’, or with the
sentence ‘the sun radiates light as well as heat’. But the opposite is clearly not
the case. The fact that a sentence appears to some or even to all of us to be ‘selfevident’, that is to say, the fact that some or even all of us believe firmly in its
truth and cannot conceive of its falsity, is no reason why it should be true. (The
fact that we are unable to conceive of the falsity of a statement is in many cases
only a reason for suspecting that our power of imagination is deficient or
undeveloped.) It is one of the gravest mistakes if a philosophy ever offers selfevidence as an argument in favour of the truth of a sentence; yet this is done by
practically all idealist philosophies. It shows that idealist philosophies are often
systems of apologetics for some dogmatic beliefs.
The excuse that we are often in such a position that we must accept certain
sentences for no better reason than that they are self-evident, is not valid. The
principles of logic and of scientific method (especially the ‘principle of
induction’ or the ‘law of uniformity of nature’) are usually mentioned as
statements which we must accept, and which we cannot justify by anything but
self-evidence. Even if this were so. it would be franker to say that we cannot
justify them, and leave it at that. But, in fact, there is no need for a ‘principle of
induction’. (Cp. my The Logic of Scientific Discovery.) And as far as the
‘principles of logic’ are concerned, much has been done in recent years which
shows that the self-evidence theory is obsolete. (Cp. especially Carnap’s Logical
Syntax of Language and his Introduction to Semantics.) See also note 44 (2).
44
(1) If we apply these considerations to the intellectual intuition of
essences, then we can see that essentialism is unable to solve the problem: How
can we find out whether or not a proposed definition which is formally correct is
true also; and especially, how can we decide between two competing
definitions? It is clear that for the methodological nominalist the answer to a
question of this kind is trivial. For let us assume that somebody maintains (with
the Oxford Dictionary) that ‘A puppy is a vain, empty-headed, impertinent
young man’, and that he insists upon upholding this definition against somebody
who clings to our previous definition. In this case, the nominalist, if he is patient
enough to do so, will point out that a quarrel about labels does not interest him,

since their choice is arbitrary; and he may suggest, if there is any danger of
ambiguity, that one can easily introduce two different labels, for example
‘puppy1’ and ‘puppy2’. And if a third party should support that ‘A puppy is a
brown dog’, then the nominalist will patiently suggest the introduction of the
label ‘puppy3’. But should the contesting parties continue to quarrel, either
because somebody insists that only his puppy is the legitimate one, or because
he insists that his puppy must, at least, be labelled ‘puppy1’, then even a very
patient nominalist would only shrug his shoulders. (In order to avoid
misunderstandings, it should be said that methodological nominalism does not
discuss the question of the existence of universals; Hobbes, accordingly, is not a
methodological nominalist, but what I should call an ontological nominalist.)
The same trivial problem, however, raises insurmountable difficulties for
the essentialist method. We have already supposed that the essentialist insists
that, for instance, ‘A puppy is a brown dog’ is not a correct definition of the
essence of ‘puppiness’. How can he defend this view? Only by an appeal to his
intellectual intuition of essences. But this fact has the practical consequence that
the essentialist is reduced to complete helplessness, if his definition is
challenged. For there are only two ways in which he can react. The one is to
reiterate stubbornly that his intellectual intuition is the only true one, to which,
of course, his opponent may reply in the same way, so that we reach a deadlock
instead of the absolutely final and indubitable knowledge which we were
promised by Aristotle. The other is to admit that his opponent’s intuition may be
as true as his own, but that it is of a different essence, which he unfortunately
denotes by the same name. This would lead to the suggestion that two different
names should be used for the two different essences, for example ‘puppy1’ and
‘puppy2’. But this step means giving up the essentialist position altogether. For it
means that we start with the defining formula and attach to it some label, i.e. that
we proceed ‘from the right to the left’; and it means that we shall have to attach
these labels arbitrarily. This can be seen by considering that the attempt to insist
that a puppy1 is, essentially, a young dog, while the brown dog can only be a
puppy2,would clearly lead to the same difficulty which has driven the
essentialist into his present dilemma. Accordingly, every definition must be
considered as equally admissible (provided it is formally correct); which means,
in Aristotelian terminology, that one basic premise is just as true as another
(which is contrary to it) and that ‘it is impossible to make a false statement’.
(This seems to have been pointed out by Antisthenes; see note 54 to this
chapter.) Thus the Aristotelian claim that intellectual intuition is a source of
knowledge as opposed to opinion, unerringly and indubitably true, and that it
furnishes us with definitions which are the safe and necessary basic premises of
all scientific deduction, is baseless in every single one of its points. And a
definition turns out to be nothing but a sentence which tells us that the defined
term means the same as the defining formula, and that each can be replaced by
the other. Its nominalist use permits us to cut a long story short and is therefore
of some practical advantage. But its essentialist use can only help us to replace a
short story by a story which means the same but is much longer. This use can
only encourage verbalism.
(2) For a criticism of Husserl’s intuition of essences, cp. J. Kraft, From
Husserl to Heidegger (in German, 1932). See also note 8 to chapter 24. Of all
authors who hold related views, M. Weber had probably the greatest influence
upon the treatment of sociological problems. He advocated for the social

sciences a ‘method of intuitive understanding’; and his ‘ideal types’ largely
correspond to the essences of Aristotle and Husserl. It is worth mentioning that
Weber saw, in spite of these tendencies, the inadmissibility of appeals to selfevidence. ‘The fact that an interpretation possesses a high degree of selfevidence proves in itself nothing about its empirical validity’ (Ges. Aufsätze,
1922, p. 404); and he says quite rightly that intuitive understanding ‘must always
be controlled by ordinary methods’. (Loc. cit., italics mine.) But if that is so,
then it is not a characteristic method of a science of ‘human behaviour’ as he
thinks; it also belongs to mathematics, physics, etc. And it turns out that those
who believe that intuitive understanding is a method peculiar to sciences of
‘human behaviour’ hold such views mainly because they cannot imagine that a
mathematician or a physicist could become so well acquainted with his object
that he could ‘get the feel of it’, in the way in which a sociologist ‘gets the feel’
of human behaviour.
45
‘Science assumes the definitions of all its terms. .’ (Ross, Aristotle, 44;
cp. Anal. Post., I, 2); see also note 30 to this chapter.
46
The following quotation is from R. H. S. Grossman, Plato To-Day 1937),
pp. 71 f. A very similar doctrine is expressed by M. R. Cohen and E. Nagel in
their book, An Introduction to Logic and Scientific Method (1936), p. 232:
‘Many of the disputes about the true nature of property, of religion, of law,..
would assuredly disappear if the precisely defined equivalents were substituted
for these words.’ (See also notes 48 and 49 to this chapter.)
The views concerning this problem expressed by Wittgenstein in his
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921/22) and by several of his followers are
not as definite as those of Grossman, Cohen, and Nagel. Wittgenstein is an antimetaphysician. ‘The book’, he writes in the preface, ‘deals with the problems of
philosophy and shows, I believe, that the method of formulating these problems
rests on the misunderstanding of the logic of our language.’ He tries to show that
metaphysics is ‘simply nonsense’ and tries to draw a limit, in our language,
between sense and nonsense: ‘The limit can .. be drawn in languages and what
lies on the other side of the limit will be simply nonsense.’ According to
Wittgenstein’s book, propositions have sense. They are true or false.
Philosophical propositions do not exist; they only look like propositions, but are,
in fact, nonsensical. The limit between sense and nonsense coincides with that
between natural science and philosophy: ‘The totality of true propositions is the
total natural science (or the totality of the natural sciences).—Philosophy is not
one of the natural sciences.” The true task of philosophy, therefore, is not to
formulate propositions; it is, rather, to clarify propositions: ‘The result of
philosophy is not a number of “philosophical propositions”, but to make
propositions clear.’ Those who do not see that, and propound philosophical
propositions, talk metaphysical nonsense.
(It should be remembered, in this connection, that a sharp distinction
between meaningful statements which have sense, and meaningless linguistic
expressions which may look like statements but which are without sense, was
first made by Russell in his attempt to solve the problems raised by the
paradoxes which he had discovered. Russell’s division of expressions which
look like statements is three-fold, since statements which may be true or false,
and meaningless or nonsensical pseudo-statements, may be distinguished. It is
important to note that this use of the terms ‘meaningless’ or ‘senseless’ partly
agrees with ordinary use, but is much sharper, since ordinarily one often calls

real statements ‘meaningless’, for example, if they are ‘absurd’, i.e. selfcontradictory, or obviously false. Thus a statement asserting of a certain
physical body that it is at the same time in two different places is not
meaningless but a false statement, or one which contradicts the use of the term
‘body’ in classical physics; and similarly, a statement asserting of a certain
electron that it has a precise place and momentum is not meaningless—as some
physicists have asserted, and as some philosophers have repeated—but it simply
contradicts modern physics.)
What has been said so far can be summed up as follows. Wittgenstein looks
for a line of demarcation between sense and nonsense, and finds that this
demarcation coincides with that between science and metaphysics, i.e. between
scientific sentences and philosophical pseudo-propositions. (That he wrongly
identifies the sphere of the natural sciences with that of true sentences shall not
concern us here; see, however, note 51 to this chapter.) This interpretation of his
aim is corroborated when we read: ‘Philosophy limits the .. sphere of natural
science.’ (All sentences so far quoted are from pp. 75 and 77.)
How is the line of demarcation ultimately drawn? How can ‘science’ be
distinguished from ‘metaphysics’, and thereby ‘sense’ from ‘nonsense’? It is the
reply given to this question which establishes the similarity between
Wittgenstein’s theory and that of Grossman and the rest. Wittgenstein implies
that the terms or ‘signs’ used by scientists have meaning, while the
metaphysician ‘has given no meaning to certain signs in his propositions’; this is
what he writes (pp. 187 and 189): ‘The right method of philosophy would be
this. To say nothing except what can be said, i.e. the propositions of natural
science, i.e. something that has nothing to do with philosophy: and then always
when someone else wished to say something metaphysical, to demonstrate to
him that he had given no meaning to certain signs in his propositions.’ In
practice, this implies that we should proceed by asking the metaphysician:
‘What do you mean by this word? What do you mean by that word?’ In other
words, we demand a definition from him: and if it is not forthcoming, we assume
that the word is meaningless.
This theory, as will be shown in the text, overlooks the facts (a) that a witty
and unscrupulous metaphysician every time he is asked, ‘What do you mean by
this word?’, will quickly proffer a definition, so that the whole game develops
into a trial of patience; (b) that the natural scientist is in no better logical
position than the metaphysician; and even, if compared with a metaphysician
who is unscrupulous, in a worse position.
It may be remarked that Schlick, in Erkenntnis, I, p. 8, where he deals with
Wittgenstein’s doctrine, mentions the difficulty of an infinite regress; but the
solution he suggests (which seems to lie in the direction of inductive definitions
or ‘constitutions’, or perhaps of operationalism; cp. note 50 to this chapter) is
neither clear nor able to solve the problem of demarcation. I think that certain of
the intentions of Wittgenstein and Schlick in demanding a philosophy of
meaning are fulfilled by that logical theory which Tarski has called ‘Semantics’.
But I also believe that the correspondence between these intentions and
Semantics does not go far; for Semantics propounds propositions; it does not
only ‘clarify’ them.—These comments upon Wittgenstein are continued in notes
51-52 to the present chapter. (See also notes 8 (2) and 32 to chapter 24; and 10
and 25 to chapter 25.)

47

It is important to distinguish between a logical deduction in general, and a
proof or demonstration in particular. A proof or demonstration is a deductive
argument by which the truth of the conclusion is finally established; this is how
Aristotle uses the term, demanding (for example, in Anal. Post., I, 4, pp. 73a, ff.)
that the ‘necessary’ truth of the conclusion should be established; and this is
how Carnap uses the term (see especially Logical Syntax, § 10, p. 29, § 47, p.
171), showing that conclusions which are ‘demonstrable’ in this sense are
‘analytically’ true. (Into the problems concerning the terms ‘analytic’ and
‘synthetic’, I shall not enter here.
Since Aristotle, it has been clear that not all logical deductions are proofs
(i.e. demonstrations); there are also logical deductions which are not proofs; for
example, we can deduce conclusions from admittedly false premises, and such
deductions are not called proofs. Non-demonstrative deductions are called by
Carnap ‘derivations’ (loc. cit.). It is interesting that a name for these nondemonstrative deductions has not been introduced earlier; it shows the
preoccupation with proofs, a preoccupation which arose from the Aristotelian
prejudice that ‘science’ or ‘scientific knowledge’ must establish all its
statements, i.e. accept them either as self-evident premises, or prove them. But
the position is this. Outside of pure logic and pure mathematics nothing can be
proved. Arguments in other sciences (and even some within mathematics, as I.
Lakatos has shown) are not proofs but merely derivations.
It may be remarked that there is a far-reaching parallelism between the
problems of derivation on the one side and definition on the other, and between
the problems of the truth of sentences and that of the meaning of terms.
A derivation starts with premises and leads to a conclusion; a definition
starts (if we read it from the right to the left) with the defining terms and leads to
a defined term. A derivation informs us about the truth of the conclusion,
provided we are informed about the truth of the premises; a definition informs
us about the meaning of the defined term, provided we are informed about the
meaning of the defining terms. Thus a derivation shifts the problem of truth
back to the premises, without ever being able to solve it; and a definition shifts
the problem of meaning back to the defining terms, without ever being able to
solve it.
48
The reason why the defining terms are likely to be rather less clear and
precise than the defined terms is that they are as a rule more abstract and
general. This is not necessarily true if certain modern methods of definition are
employed (‘definition by abstraction’, a method of symbolic logic); but it is
certainly true of all those definitions which Grossman can have in mind, and
especially of all Aristotelian definitions (by genus and differentia).
It has been held by some positivists, especially under the influence of Locke
and Hume, that it is possible to define abstract terms like those of science or of
politics (see text to next note) in terms of particular, concrete observations or
even of sensations. Such an ‘inductive’ method of definition has been called by
Carnap ‘constitution’. But we can say that it is impossible to ‘constitute’
universals in terms of particulars. (With this, cp. my The Logic of Scientific
Discovery, especially sections 14, pp. 64 ff., and 25, p. 93; and Carnap’s
Testability and Meaning, in Philosophy of Science, vol. 3, 1936, pp. 419 ff., and
vol. 4, pp. 1 ff.)
49
The examples are the same as those which Cohen and Nagel, op. cit., 232
f., recommend for definition. (Cp. note 46 to this chapter.)

Some general remarks on the uselessness of essentialist definitions may be
added here. (Cp. also end of note 44 (1) to this chapter.)
(1) The attempt to solve a factual problem by reference to definitions
usually means the substitution of a merely verbal problem for the factual one.
(There is an excellent example of this method in Aristotle’s Physics, II, 6,
towards the end.) This may be shown for the following examples. (a) There is a
factual problem: Can we return to the cage of tribalism? And by what means?
(b) There is a moral problem: Should we return to the cage?
The philosopher of meaning, if faced by (a) or (b), will say: It all depends
on what you mean by your vague terms; tell me how you define ‘return’, ‘cage’,
‘tribalism’, and with the help of these definitions I may be able to decide your
problem. Against this, I maintain that if the decision can be made with the help
of the definitions, if it follows from the definitions, then the problem so decided
was merely a verbal problem; for it has been solved independently of facts or of
moral decisions.
(2) An essentialist philosopher of meaning may do even worse, especially
in connection with problem (b); he may suggest, for example, that it depends
upon ‘the essence’ or ‘the essential character’ or perhaps upon ‘the destiny’ of
our civilization whether or not we should try to return. (See also note 61 (2) to
this chapter.)
(3) Essentialism and the theory of definition have led to an amazing
development in Ethics. The development is one of increasing abstraction and
loss of touch with the basis of all ethics—the practical moral problems, to be
decided by us here and now. It leads first to the general question, ‘What is
good?’ or ‘What is the Good?’; next to ‘What does “Good” mean?’ and next to
‘Can the problem “What does ‘Good’ mean?” be answered?’ or ‘Can “good” be
defined?’ G. E. Moore, who raised this last problem in his Principia Ethica, was
certainly right in insisting that ‘good’ in the moral sense cannot be defined in
‘naturalistic’ terms. For, indeed, if we could, it would mean something like
‘bitter’ or ‘sweet’ or ‘green’ or ‘red’; and it would be utterly irrelevant from the
point of view of morality. Just as we need not attain the bitter, or the sweet, etc.,
there would be no reason to take any moral interest in a naturalistic ‘good’. But
although Moore was right in what is perhaps justly considered his main point, it
may be held that an analysis of good or of any other concept or essence can in
no way contribute to an ethical theory which bears upon the only relevant basis
of all ethics, the immediate moral problem that must be solved here and now.
Such an analysis can lead only to the substitution of a verbal problem for a
moral one. (Cp. also note 18 (1) to chapter 5, especially upon the irrelevance of
moral judgements.)
50
I have in mind the methods of ‘constitution’ (see note 48 to this chapter),
‘implicit definition’, ‘definition by correlation’, and ‘operational definition’. The
arguments of the ‘operationalists’ seem to be in the main true enough; but they
cannot get over the fact that in their operational definitions, or descriptions, they
need universal terms which have to be taken as undefined; and to them, the
problem applies again.
A few hints or allusions may be added here concerning the way we ‘use our
terms’. For the sake of brevity, these hints will refer without explanation to
certain technicalities; they may therefore, in the present form, not be generally
understandable.

Of the so-called implicit definitions, especially in mathematics, Carnap has
shown (Symposion I, 1927, 355 ff.; cp. also his Abriss) that they do not ‘define’
in the ordinary sense of this word; a system of implicit definitions cannot be
considered as defining a ‘model’, but it defines a whole class of ‘models’.
Accordingly, the system of symbols defined by a system of implicit definitions
cannot be considered as a system of constants, but they must be considered as
variables (with a definite range, and bound by the system in a certain way to one
another). I believe that there is a limited analogy between this situation and the
way we ‘use our terms’ in science The analogy can be described in this way. In
a branch of mathematics in which we operate with signs defined by implicit
definition, the fact that these signs have no ‘definite meaning’ does not affect
our operating with them, or the precision of our theories. Why is that so?
Because we do not overburden the signs. We do not attach a ‘meaning’ to them,
beyond that shadow of a meaning that is warranted by our implicit definitions.
(And if we attach to them an intuitive meaning, then we are careful to treat this
as a private auxiliary device, which must not interfere with the theory.) In this
way, we try to keep, as it were, within the ‘penumbra of vagueness’ or of
ambiguity, and to avoid touching the problem of the precise limits of this
penumbra or range; and it turns out that we can achieve a great deal without
discussing the meaning of these signs; for nothing depends on their meaning. In
a similar way, I believe, we can operate with these terms whose meaning we
have learned ‘operationally’. We use them, as it were, so that nothing depends
upon their meaning, or as little as possible. Our ‘operational definitions’ have
the advantage of helping us to shift the problem into a field in which nothing or
little depends on words. Clear speaking is speaking in such a way that words do
not matter.
51
Wittgenstein teaches in the Tractatus (cp. note 46 to this chapter where
further cross-references are given) that philosophy cannot propound
propositions, and that all philosophical propositions are in fact senseless pseudopropositions. Closely connected with this is his doctrine that the true task of
philosophy is not to propound sentences but to clarify them: ‘The object of
philosophy is the logical clarification of thoughts.—Philosophy is not a theory
but an activity. A philosophical work consists essentially of elucidations.’ (Op.
cit., p. 77.)
The question arises whether this view is in keeping with Wittgenstein’s
fundamental aim, the destruction of metaphysics by unveiling it as meaningless
nonsense. In my The Logic of Scientific Discovery (see especially pp. 311 ff.), I
have tried to show that Wittgenstein’s method leads to a merely verbal solution
and that it must give rise, in spite of its apparent radicalism, not to the
destruction or to the exclusion or even to the clear demarcation of metaphysics,
but to their intrusion into the field of science, and to their confusion with
science. The reasons for this are simple enough.
(1) Let us consider one of Wittgenstein’s sentences, for example,
‘Philosophy is not a theory but an activity’. Surely, this is not a sentence
belonging to ‘total natural science (or the totality of the natural sciences)’.
Therefore, according to Wittgenstein (see note 46 to this chapter), it cannot
belong to ‘the totality of true propositions’. On the other hand, it is not a false
proposition either (since if it were, its negation would have to be true, and to
belong to natural science). Thus we arrive at the result that it must be
‘meaningless’ or ‘senseless’ or ‘nonsensical’; and the same holds for most of

Wittgenstein’s propositions. This consequence of his doctrine is recognized by
Wittgenstein himself, for he writes (p. 189): ‘My propositions are elucidatory in
this way: he who understands me finally recognizes them as senseless. .’ The
result is important. Wittgenstein’s own philosophy is senseless, and it is
admitted to be so. ‘On the other hand’, as Wittgenstein says in his Preface, ‘the
truth of the thoughts communicated here seems to me unassailable and definite.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the problems have in essentials been finally
solved.’ This shows that we can communicate unassailably and definitely true
thoughts by way of propositions which are admittedly nonsensical, and that we
can solve problems ‘finally’ by propounding nonsense. (Cp. also note 8 (2, b) to
chapter 24.)
Consider what this means. It means that all the metaphysical nonsense
against which Bacon, Hume, Kant, and Russell have fought for centuries may
now comfortably settle down, and even frankly admit that it is nonsense.
(Heidegger does so; cp. note 87 to chapter 12.) For now we have a new kind of
nonsense at our disposal, nonsense that communicates thoughts whose truth is
unassailable and definitive; in other words, deeply significant nonsense.
I do not deny that Wittgenstein’s thoughts are unassailable and definitive.
For how could one assail them? Obviously, whatever one says against them
must be philosophical and therefore nonsense. And it can be dismissed as such.
We are thus faced with that kind of position which I have described elsewhere,
in connection with Hegel (cp. note 33 to chapter 12) as a reinforced dogmatism.
‘All you need’, I wrote in my Logik der Forschung (now translated as The Logic
of Scientific Discovery: see p. 51), p. 21, ‘is to determine the conception of
“sense” or of “meaning” in a suitably narrow way, and you can say of all
uncomfortable questions that you cannot find any “sense” or “meaning” in them.
By recognizing the problems of natural science alone as “meaningful”, every
debate about the concept of meaning must become nonsensical. Once enthroned,
the dogma of meaning is for ever raised above the possibility of attack. It is
“unassailable and definitive”.’
(2) But not only does Wittgenstein’s theory invite every kind of
metaphysical nonsense to pose as deeply significant; it also blurs what I have
called (op. cit., p. 7) the problem of demarcation. This he does because of his
naive idea that there is something ‘essentially’ or ‘by nature’ scientific and
something ‘essentially’ or ‘by nature’ metaphysical and that it is our task to
discover the ‘natural’ demarcation between these two. ‘Positivism’, I may quote
myself again (op. cit., p. 8), ‘interprets the problem of demarcation in a
naturalistic way; instead of interpreting this question as one to be decided
according to practical usefulness, it asks for a difference that exists “by nature”,
as it were, between natural science and metaphysics.’ But it is clear that the
philosophical or methodological task can only be to suggest and to devise a
useful demarcation between these two. This can hardly be done by
characterizing metaphysics as ‘senseless’ or ‘meaningless’. First, because these
terms are better fitted for giving vent to one’s personal indignation about
metaphysicians and metaphysical systems than for a technical characterization
of a line of demarcation. Secondly, because the problem is only shifted, for we
must now ask: ‘What do “meaningful” and “meaningless” mean?’ If
meaningful’ is only an equivalent for ‘scientific’, and ‘meaningless’ for ‘nonscientific’, then we have clearly made no progress. For reasons such as these I
suggested (op. cit., 8 ff., 21 f., 227) that we eliminate the emotive terms

‘meaning’, ‘meaningful’, ‘meaningless’, etc., from the methodological
discussion altogether. (Recommending that we solve the problem of
demarcation by using falsifiability or testability, or degrees of testability, as
criterion of the empirical character of a scientific system, I suggested that it was
of no advantage to introduce ‘meaningful’ as an emotive equivalent of
‘testable’.) * In spite of my explicit refusal to regard falsifiability or testability
(or anything else) as a ‘criterion of meaning’, I find that philosophers frequently
attribute to me the proposal to adopt this as a criterion of meaning or of
‘meaningfulness’. (See, for example, Philosophic Thought in France and in the
United States, edited by M. Farber, 1950, p. 570.) *
But even if we eliminate all reference to ‘meaning’ or ‘sense’ from
Wittgenstein’s theories, his solution of the problem of demarcating science from
metaphysics remains most unfortunate. For since he identifies ‘the totality of
true propositions’ with the totality of natural science, he excludes all those
hypotheses from ‘the sphere of natural science’ which are not true. And since we
can never know of a hypothesis whether or not it is true, we can never know
whether or not it belongs to the sphere of natural science. The same unfortunate
result, namely, a demarcation that excludes all hypotheses from the sphere of
natural science, and therefore includes them in the field of metaphysics, is
attained by Wittgenstein’s famous ‘principle of verification’, as I pointed out in
Erkenntnis, 3 (1933), p. 427. (For a hypothesis is, strictly speaking, not
verifiable, and if we speak loosely, then we can say that even a metaphysical
system like that of the early atomists has been verified.) Again, this conclusion
has been drawn in later years by Wittgenstein himself, who, according to
Schlick (cp. my The Logic of Scientific Discovery, note 7 to section 4), asserted
in 1931 that scientific theories are ‘not really propositions’, i.e. not meaningful.
Theories, hypotheses, that is to say, the most important of all scientific
utterances, are thus thrown out of the temple of natural science, and therefore
put on a level with metaphysics.
Wittgenstein’s original view in the Tractatus can only be explained by the
assumption that he overlooked the difficulties connected with the status of a
scientific hypothesis which always goes far beyond a simple enunciation of fact;
he overlooked the problem of universality or generality. In this, he followed in
the footsteps of earlier positivists, notably of Comte, who wrote (cp. his Early
Essays on Social Philosophy, edited by H. D. Hutton, 1911, p. 223; see F. A.
von Hayek, Economica, VIII, 1941, p. 300): ‘Observation of facts is the only
solid basis of human knowledge ... a proposition which does not admit of being
reduced to a simple enunciation of fact, special or general, can have no real and
intelligible sense.” Comte, although he remained unaware of the gravity of the
problem hidden behind the simple phrases ‘general fact’, at least mentions this
problem, by inserting the words ‘special or general’. If we omit these words,
then the passage becomes a very clear and concise formulation of Wittgenstein’s
fundamental criterion of sense or meaning, as formulated by him in the
Tractatus (all propositions are truth-functions of, and therefore reducible to,
atomic propositions, i.e. pictures of atomic facts), and as expounded by Schlick
in 1931.—Comte’s criterion of meaning was adopted by J. S. Mill.
To sum up. The anti-metaphysical theory of meaning in Wittgenstein’s
Tractatus, far from helping to combat metaphysical dogmatism and oracular
philosophy, represents a reinforced dogmatism that opens wide the door to the

enemy, deeply significant metaphysical nonsense, and throws out, by the same
door, the best friend, that is to say, scientific hypothesis.
52
It appears that irrationalism in the sense of a doctrine or creed that does
not propound connected and debatable arguments but rather propounds
aphorisms and dogmatic statements which must be ‘understood’ or else left
alone, will generally tend to become the property of an esoteric circle of the
initiated. And, indeed, this prognosis seems to be partly corroborated by some of
the publications that come from Wittgenstein’s school. (I do not wish to
generalize; for example, everything I have seen of F. Waismann’s writing is
presented as a chain of rational and exceedingly clear arguments and entirely
free from the attitude of ‘take it or leave it’.)’
Some of these esoteric publications seem to be without a serious problem;
to me, they appear to be subtle for subtlety’s sake. It is significant that they
come from a school which started by denouncing philosophy for the barren
subtlety of its attempts to deal with pseudo-problems.
I may end this criticism by stating briefly that I do not think that there is
much justification for fighting metaphysics in general, or that anything worth
while will result from such a fight. It is necessary to solve the problem of the
demarcation of science from metaphysics. But we should recognize that many
metaphysical systems have led to important scientific results. I mention only the
system of Democritus; and that of Schopenhauer which is very similar to that of
Freud. And some, for instance those of Plato or Malebranche or Schopenhauer,
are beautiful structures of thought. But I believe, at the same time, that we
should fight those metaphysical systems which tend to bewitch and to confuse
us. But clearly, we should do the same even with un-metaphysical and antimetaphysical systems, if they exhibit this dangerous tendency. And I think that
we cannot do this at one stroke. We have rather to take the trouble to analyse the
systems in some detail; we must show that we understand what the author
means, but that what he means is not worth the effort to understand it. (It is
characteristic of all these dogmatic systems and especially of the esoteric
systems that their admirers assert of all critics that ‘they do not understand’; but
these admirers forget that understanding must lead to agreement only in the case
of sentences with a trivial content. In all other cases, one can understand and
disagree.)
53
Cp. Schopenhauer, Grundprobleme (4th ed., 1890, p. 147). He comments
upon ‘intellectually intuiting reason that makes its pronouncements from the
tripod of the oracle’ (hence my term ‘oracular philosophy’); and he continues:
‘This is the origin of that philosophic method which entered the stage
immediately after Kant, of this method of mystifying and imposing upon people,
of deceiving them and throwing dust in their eyes—the method of windbaggery.
One day this era will be recognized by the history of philosophy as the age of
dishonesty.’ (Then follows the passage quoted in the text.) Concerning the
irrationalist attitude of ‘take it or leave it’, cp. also text to notes 39-40 to chapter
24.
54
Plato’s theory of definition (cp. note 27 to chapter 3 and note 23 to
chapter 5), which Aristotle later developed and systematized, met its main
opposition (1) from Antisthenes, (2) from the school of Isocrates, especially
Theopompus.
(1) Simplicius, one of the best of our sources on these very doubtful
matters, presents Antisthenes (ad Arist. Categ., pp. 66b, 67b) as an opponent of

Plato’s theory of Forms or Ideas, and in fact, of the doctrine of essentialism and
intellectual intuition altogether. ‘I can see a horse, Plato’, Antisthenes is reported
to have said, ‘but I cannot see its horseness.’ (A very similar argument is
attributed by a lesser source, D.L., VI, 53, to Diogenes the Cynic, and there is no
reason why the latter should not have used it too.) I think that we may rely upon
Simplicius (who appears to have had access to Theophrastus), considering that
Aristotle’s own testimony in the Metaphysics (especially in Met., 1043b24)
squares well with this anti-essentialism of Antisthenes.
The two passages in the Metaphysics in which Aristotle mentions
Antisthenes’ objection to the essentialist theory of definitions are both very
interesting. In the first (Met., 1024b32) we hear that Antisthenes raised the point
discussed in note 44 (1) to this chapter; that is to say, that there is no way of
distinguishing between a ‘true’ and a ‘false’ definition (of ‘puppy’, for example)
so that two apparently contradictory definitions would only refer to two different
essences, ‘puppy1’ and ‘puppy2’; thus there would be no contradiction, and it
would hardly be possible to speak of false sentences. ‘Antisthenes’, Aristotle
writes about this criticism, ‘showed his crudity by claiming that nothing could
be described except by its proper formula, one formula for one thing; from
which it followed that there could be no contradiction; and almost that it was
impossible to make a false statement.’ (The passage has usually been interpreted
as containing Antithenes’ positive theory, instead of his criticism of the doctrine
of definition. But this interpretation neglects Aristotle’s context. The whole
passage deals with the possibility of false definitions, i.e. with precisely that
problem which gives rise, in view of the inadequacy of the theory of intellectual
intuition, to the difficulties described in note 44 (1). And it is clear from
Aristotle’s text that he is troubled by these difficulties as well as by Antisthenes’
attitude towards them.) The second passage (Met., 1043b24) also agrees with the
criticism of essentialist definitions developed in the present chapter. It shows
that Antisthenes attacked essentialist definitions as useless, as merely
substituting a long story for a short one; and it shows further that Antisthenes
very wisely admitted that, although it is useless to define, it is possible to
describe or to explain a thing by referring to the similarity it bears to a thing
already known, or, if it is composite, by explaining what its parts are. ‘Indeed
there is’, Aristotle writes, ‘something in that difficulty which has been raised by
the Antisthenians and other such-like uneducated people. They said that what a
thing is’ (or the ‘what is it’ of a thing) ‘cannot be defined; for the so-called
definition, they say, is nothing but a long formula. But they admit that it is
possible to explain, for example of silver, what sort of a thing it is; for we may
say that it is similar to tin.’ From this doctrine it would follow, Aristotle adds,
‘that it is possible to give a definition and a formula of the composite kind of
things or substances, whether they are sensible things, or objects of intellectual
intuition; but not of their primary parts ..’ (In the sequel, Aristotle wanders off,
trying to link this argument with his doctrine that a defining formula is
composed of two parts, genus and differentia, which are related, and united, like
matter and form.)
I have dealt here with this matter since it appears that the enemies of
Antisthenes, for example Aristotle (cp. Topics, I, 104b21), cited what he said in
a manner which has led to the impression that it is not Antisthenes’ criticism of
essentialism but rather his positive doctrine. This impression was made possible
by mixing it up with another doctrine probably held by Antisthenes; I have in

mind the simple doctrine that we must speak plainly, just using each term in one
meaning, and that in this way we can avoid all those difficulties whose solution
is unsuccessfully attempted by the theory of definitions.
All these matters are, as mentioned before, very uncertain, owing to the
scantiness of our evidence. But I think that Grote is likely to be right when he
characterizes ‘this debate between Antisthenes and Plato’ as the ‘first protest of
Nominalism against the doctrine of an extreme Realism’ (or in our terminology,
of an extreme essentialism). Grote’s position may be thus defended against
Field’s attack (Plato and His Contemporaries, 167) that it is ‘quite wrong’ to
describe Antisthenes as a nominalist. In support of my interpretation of
Antisthenes, I may mention that against the scholastic theory of definitions, very
similar arguments were used by Descartes (cp. The Philosophical Works,
translated by Haldane and Ross, 1911, vol. I, p. 317) and, less clearly, by Locke
(Essay, Book III, ch. III, § II, to ch. IV, §6; also ch. X, §§ 4 to II; see especially
ch. IV, §5) Both Descartes and Locke, however, remained essentialists.
Essentialism itself was attacked by Hobbes (cp. note 33 above) and by Berkeley
who might be described as one of the first to hold a methodological nominalism,
quite apart from his ontological nominalism; see also note 7 (2) to chapter 25.
(2) Of other critics of the Platonic-Aristotelian theory of definition, I
mention only Theopompus (quoted by Epictetus, II, 17, 4-10; see Grote, Plato, I,
324). I think it likely that, as opposed to the generally accepted view, Socrates
himself would not have favoured the theory of definitions; what he seems to
have combated was the merely verbal solution of ethical problems; and his socalled attempted definitions of ethical terms, considering their negative results,
may well be attempts to destroy verbalist prejudices.
(3) I wish to add here that in spite of all my criticism I am very ready to
admit Aristotle’s merits. He is the founder of logic, and down to Principia
Mathematics, all logic can be said to be an elaboration and generalization of the
Aristotelian beginnings. (A new epoch in logic has indeed begun, in my opinion,
though not with the so-called ‘non-Aristotelian’ or ‘multi-valued’ systems, but
rather with the clear distinction between ‘object-language’ and ‘metalanguage’.) Furthermore, Aristotle has the great merit of having tried to tame
idealism by his common-sense approach which insists that only individual
things are ‘real’ (and that their ‘forms’ and ‘matter’ are only aspects or
abstractions). * Yet this very approach is responsible for the fact that Aristotle
docs not even attempt to solve Plato’s problem of universals (see notes 19 and
20 to chapter 3, and text), i.e., the problem of explaining why certain things
resemble one another and others do not. For why should there not be as many
different Aristotelian essences in things as there are things? *
55
The influence of Platonism especially upon the Gospel of St. John is
clear; and this influence is less noticeable in the earlier Gospels, though I do not
assert that it is absent. Nevertheless the Gospels exhibit a clearly antiintellectualist and anti-philosophizing tendency. They avoid an appeal to
philosophical speculation, and they are definitely against scholarship and
dialectics, for instance, that of the ‘scribes’; but scholarship means, in this
period, interpreting the scriptures in a dialectical and philosophical sense, and
especially in the sense of the Neo-Platonists.
56
The problem of nationalism and the superseding of Jewish parochial
tribalism by internationalism plays a most important part in the early history of
Christianity; the echoes of these struggles can be found in the Acts (especially

10, 15 ff.; 11, 1-18; see also St. Matthew 3, 9, and the polemics against tribal
feeding taboos in Acts 10, 10-15). It is interesting that this problem turns up
together with the social problem of wealth and poverty, and with that of slavery;
see Galatians 3, 28; and especially Acts 5, I-II, where the retention of private
property is described as mortal sin.
The survival in the Ghettos of eastern Europe, down to 1914 and even
longer, of arrested and petrified forms of Jewish tribalism is very interesting
(Cp. the way in which the Scottish tribes attempted to cling to their tribal life.)
57
The quotation is from Toynbee, A Study of History, vol. VI, p. 202; the
passage deals with the motive for the persecution of Christianity by the Roman
rulers, who were usually very tolerant in matters of religion. ‘The element in
Christianity’, Toynbee writes, ‘that was intolerable to the Imperial Government
was the Christians’ refusal to accept the Government’s claim that it was entitled
to compel its subjects to act against their conscience ... So far from checking the
propagation of Christianity, the martyrdoms proved the most effective agencies
of conversion ..’
58
For Julian’s Neo-Platonic Anti-Church with its Platonizing hierarchy, and
his fight against the ‘atheists’, i.e. Christianity, cp. for example Toynbee, op.
cit., V, pp. 565 and 584; I may quote a passage from J. Geffken (quoted by
Toynbee, loc. cit.): ‘In Jamblichus’ (a pagan philosopher and number-mystic
and founder of the Syrian school of Neo-Platonists, living about A.D. 300) ‘the
individual religious experience .. is eliminated. Its place is taken by a mystical
church with sacraments, by a scrupulous exactness in carrying out the forms of
worship, by a ritual that is closely akin to magic, and by a clergy ... Julian’s
ideas about the elevation of the priesthood reproduce .. exactly the standpoint of
Jamblichus, whose zeal for the priests, for the details of the forms of worship,
and for a systematic orthodox doctrine has prepared the ground for the
construction of a pagan church.’ We can recognize in these principles of the
Syrian Platonist and of Julian the development of the genuine Platonic (and
perhaps also late Jewish; cp. note 56 to this chapter) tendency to resist the
revolutionary religion of individual conscience and humaneness by arresting all
change and by introducing a rigid doctrine kept pure by a philosophic priest
caste and by rigid taboos. (Cp. text to notes 14 and 18-23 to chapter 7; and
chapter 8, especially text to note 34.) With Justinian’s prosecution of nonChristians and heretics and his suppression of philosophy in 529, the tables are
turned; it is now Christianity which adopts totalitarian methods and the control
of conscience by violence. The dark ages begin.
59
For Toynbee’s warning against an interpretation of the rise of Christianity
in the sense of Pareto’s advice (for which cp. notes 65 to chapter 10 and 1 to
chapter 13) see, for example, A Study of History, V, 709.
60
For Critias’ and Plato’s and Aristotle’s cynical doctrine that religion is
opium for the people, cp. notes 5 to 18 (especially 15 and 18) to chapter 8. (See
also Aristotle’s Topics, I, 2, 101a30 ff.) For later examples (Polybius and
Strabo) see, for example, Toynbee, op. cit., V, 646 f., 561. Toynbee quotes from
Polybius (Historiae, VI, 56): ‘The point in which the Roman constitution excels
others most conspicuously is to be found, in my opinion, in its handling of
Religion ... The Romans have managed to forge the main bond of their social
order .. out of superstition.’ etc. And he quotes from Strabo: ‘A rabble .. cannot
be induced to answer to the call of Philosophic Reason ... In dealing with people
of that sort, you cannot do without superstition.’ etc. In view of this long series

of Platonizing philosophers who teach that religion is ‘opium for the people’ I
fail to see how the imputation of similar motives to Constantine can be
described as anachronistic.
It may be mentioned that it is a formidable opponent of whom Toynbee
says, by implication, that he lacks historical sense: Lord Acton. For he writes
(cp. his History of Freedom, 1909, p. 30 f., italics mine) of Constantine’s
relation to the Christians: ‘Constantine, in adopting their faith, intended neither
to abandon his predecessor’s scheme of policy nor to renounce the fascinations
of arbitrary authority, but to strengthen his throne with the support of a religion
which had astonished the world by its power of resistance ..’
61
I admire the mediaeval cathedrals as much as anybody, and I am perfectly
prepared to recognize the greatness and uniqueness of mediaeval craftsmanship.
But I believe that aestheticism must never be used as an argument against
humanitarianism.
The eulogy of the Middle Ages seems to begin with the Romantic
movement in Germany, and it has become fashionable with the renaissance of
this Romantic movement which unfortunately we are witnessing at the present
time. It is, of course, an anti-rationalist movement; it will be discussed from
another point of view in chapter 24. The two attitudes towards the Middle Ages,
rationalism and anti-rationalism, correspond to two interpretations of history’
(cp. chapter 25).
(1) The rationalist interpretation of history views with hope those periods in
which man attempted to look upon human affairs rationally. It sees in the Great
Generation and especially in Socrates, in early Christianity (down to
Constantine), in the Renaissance and the period of the Enlightenment, and in
modern science, parts of an often interrupted movement, the efforts of men to
free themselves, to break out of the cage of the closed society, and to form an
open society. It is aware that this movement does not represent a ‘law of
progress’ or anything of that sort, but that it depends solely upon ourselves. and
must disappear if we do not defend it against its antagonists as well as against
laziness and indolence. This interpretation sees in the intervening periods dark
ages with their Platonizing authorities, their hierarchies of priest and tribalist
orders of knights.
A classical formulation of this interpretation has been made by Lord Acton
(op. cit., p. 1; italics mine). ‘Liberty,’ he writes, ‘next to religion, has been the
motive of good deeds and the common pretext of crime, from the sowing of the
seed at Athens, two thousand five hundred and sixty years ago ... In every age its
progress has been beset by its natural enemies, by ignorance and superstition, by
lust of conquest and by love of ease, by the strong man’s craving for power, and
the poor man’s craving for food. During long intervals it has been utterly
arrested .. No obstacle has been so constant, or so difficult to overcome, as
uncertainty and confusion touching the nature of true liberty. If hostile interests
have wrought much injury, false ideas have wrought still more.’
It is strange how strong a feeling of darkness prevails in the dark ages. Their
science and their philosophy are both obsessed by the feeling that the truth has
once been known, and has been lost. This expresses itself in the belief in the lost
secret of the ancient philosophers’ stone and in the ancient wisdom of astrology
no less than in the belief that an idea cannot be of any value if it is new, and that
every idea needs the backing of ancient authority (Aristotle and the Bible). But
the men who felt that the secret key to wisdom was lost in the past were right.

For this key is faith in reason, and liberty. It is the free competition of thought,
which cannot exist without freedom of thought.
(2) The other interpretation agrees with Toynbee in seeing, in Greek as well
as in modern rationalism (since the Renaissance), an aberration from the path of
faith. ‘To the present writer’s eye’, Toynbee says (A Study of History, vol. V, p.
6 f., note; italics mine), ‘the common element of rationalism which may be
discernible in the Hellenic and Western Civilization is not so distinctive as to
mark this pair of societies off from all other representatives of the species ... If
we regard the Christian element of our Western Civilization as being the essence
of it, then our reversion to Hellenism might be taken to be, not a fulfilment of the
potentialities of Western Christendom, but an aberration from the proper path of
Western growth—in fact, a false step which it may or may not be possible now to
retrieve.’
In contrast to Toynbee, I do not doubt for a minute that it is possible to
retrieve this step and to return to the cage, to the oppressions, superstition. and
pestilences, of the Middle Ages. But I believe that we had much better not do so.
And I contend that what we ought to do will have to be decided by ourselves,
through free decisions, and not by historicist essentialism; nor, as Toynbee holds
(see also note 49 (2) to this chapter), by ‘the question of what the essential
Character of the Western Civilization may be’.
(The passages here quoted from Toynbee are parts of his reply to a letter
from Dr. E. Bevan; and Bevan’s letter, i.e. the first of his two letters quoted by
Toynbee, seems to me to present very clearly indeed what I call the rationalist
interpretation.)
62
See H. Zinsser, Rats, Lice, and History (1937), pp. So and 83; italics
mine.
Concerning my remark in the text, at the end of this chapter, that
Democritus’ science and morals still live with us, I may mention that a direct
historical connection leads from Democritus and Epicurus via Lucretius not only
to Gassendi but undoubtedly to Locke also. ‘Atoms and the void’ is the
characteristic phrase whose presence always reveals the influence of this
tradition; and as a rule, the natural philosophy of ‘atoms and the void’ goes
together with the moral philosophy of an altruistic hedonism or utilitarianism. In
regard to hedonism and utilitarianism, I believe that it is indeed necessary to
replace their principle: maximize pleasure! by one which is probably more in
keeping with the original views of Democritus and Epicurus, more modest, and
much more urgent. I mean the rule: minimize pain! I believe (cp. chapters 9, 24,
and 25) that it is not only impossible but very dangerous to attempt to maximize
the pleasure or the happiness of the people, since such an attempt must lead to
totalitarianism. But there is little doubt that most of the followers of Democritus
(down to Bertrand Russell, who is still interested in atoms, geometry, and
hedonism) would have little quarrel with the suggested re-formulation of their
pleasure principle provided it is taken for what it is meant, and not for an ethical
criterion.

Notes To Chapter 12
General Note to this Chapter. Wherever possible, I refer in these notes to
Selections, i.e. to Hegel: Selections, edited by J. Loewenberg, 1929. (From The
Modern Student’s Library of Philosophy.) This excellent and easily accessible

selection contains a great number of the most characteristic passages from
Hegel, so that it was possible in many cases to choose the quotations from them.
Quotations from the Selections will, however, be accompanied by references to
editions of the original texts. Wherever possible I have referred to ‘WW’, i.e. to
Hegel’s Sämtliche Werke, herausgegeben von H. Glockner, Stuttgart (from 1927
on). An important version of the Encyclopedia, however, which is not included
in WW, is quoted as ‘Encycl. 1870’, i.e., G. W. F. Hegel, Encyclopädie,
herausgegeben von K. Rosenkranz, Berlin 1870. Passages from the Philosophy
of Law (or Philosophy of Right) are quoted by paragraph numbers, and the letter
L indicates that the passage is from the lecture notes added by Cans in his
edition of 1833. I have not always adopted the wording of the translators.
1
In his Inaugural Dissertation, De Orbitis Planetarum, 1801. (The asteroid
Ceres had been discovered on the 1st of January, 1801.)
2
Democritus, fragm., 118 (D2); cp. text to note 29 to chapter 10.
3
Schopenhauer, Grundprobleme (4th ed., 1890), p. 147; cp. note 53 to
chapter 11.
4
The whole Philosophy of Nature is full of such definitions. H. Stafford
Hatfield, for instance, translates (cp. his translation of Bavink, The Anatomy of
Modern Science, p. 30) Hegel’s definition of heat: ‘Heat is the self-restoration of
matter in its formlessness, its liquidity the triumph of its abstract homogeneity
over specific definiteness, its abstract, purely self-existing continuity, as
negation of negation, is here set as activity.’ Similar is, for example, Hegel’s
definition of electricity.
For the next quotation see Hegel’s Briefe, I, 373, quoted by Wallace, The
Logic of Hegel (transl., p. xiv f., italics mine).
5
Cp. Falkenberg, History of Modern Philosophy (6th German ed., 1908,
612; cp. the English translation by Armstrong, 1895, 632).
6
I have in mind the various philosophies of ‘evolution’ or ‘progress’ or
‘emergence’ such as those of H. Bergson, S. Alexander, Field-Marshal Smuts or
A. N. Whitehead.
7
The passage is quoted and analysed in note 43 (2), below.
8
For the eight quotations in this paragraph, cp. Selections, pp. 389 ( = WW
vi, 71), 447, 443, 446 (three quotations); 388 (two quotations) ( = WW, xi, 70).
The passages are from The Philosophy of Law (§§ 272L, 258L, 269L, 270L); the
first and the last are from the Philosophy of History.
For Hegel’s holism, and for his organic theory of the state, see for example
his reference to Menenius Agrippa (Livy, II, 32; for a criticism, see note 7 to
chapter 10) in the Philosophy of Law, § 269L; and his classical formulation of
the opposition between the power of an organized body and the powerless ‘heap,
or aggregate, of atomic units’, at the end of § 290L (cp. also note 70 to this
chapter).
Two other very important points in which Hegel adopts Plato’s political
teaching are: (1) The theory of the One, the Few, and the Many; see, for
example, op. cit., § 273: The monarch is one person; the few enter the scene with
the executive; and the many .. with the legislative; also the reference is to ‘the
many’ in § 301, etc. (2) The theory of the opposition between knowledge and
opinion (cp. the discussion of op. cit., § 270, on freedom of thought, in the text
between notes 37 and 38, below), which Hegel uses for characterizing public
opinion as the ‘opinion of the many’ or even as the ‘caprice of the many’, cp.
op. cit., §§ 316 ff., and note 76, below.

For Hegel’s interesting criticism of Plato, and the even more interesting
twist he gives to his own criticism, cp. note 43 (2) to this chapter.
9
For these remarks, cp. especially chapter 25.
10
Cp. Selections, xii (J. Loewenberg in the Introduction to the Selections).
11
I have in mind not only his immediate philosophical predecessors (Fichte,
Schlegel, Schelling, and especially Schleiermacher), or his ancient sources
(Heraclitus, Plato, Aristotle), but especially Rousseau, Spinoza, Montesquieu,
Herder, Burke (cp. section IV to this chapter), and the poet Schiller. Hegel’s
indebtedness to Rousseau, Montesquieu (cp. The Spirit of the Laws, XIX, 4 f.),
and Herder, for his Spirit of the Nation, is obvious. His relations to Spinoza are
of a different character. He adopts, or rather adapts, two important ideas of the
determinist Spinoza. The first is that there is no freedom but in the rational
recognition of the necessity of all things, and in the power which reason, by this
recognition, may exert over the passions. This idea is developed by Hegel into
an identification of reason (or ‘Spirit’) with freedom, and of his teaching that
freedom is the truth of necessity (Selections, 213, Encycl. 1870, p. 154). The
second idea is Spinoza’s strange moral positivism, his doctrine that might is
right, an idea which he contrived to use for the fight against what he called
tyranny i.e. the attempt to wield power beyond the limits of one’s actual power.
Spinoza’s main concern being the freedom of thought, he taught that it is
impossible for a ruler to force men’s thoughts (for thoughts are free), and that
the attempt to achieve the impossible is tyrannical. On this doctrine, he based his
support of the power of the secular state (which, he naively hoped, would not
curtail the freedom of thought) as against the church. Hegel also supported the
state against the church, and he paid lip-service to the demand for freedom of
thought whose great political significance he realized (cp. the preface to the
Phil. of Law); but at the same time he perverted this idea, claiming that the state
must decide what is true and false, and may suppress what it deems to be false
(see the discussion of the Phil. of Law, § 270, in the text between notes 37 and
38, below). From Schiller, Hegel took (incidentally without acknowledgement
or even indication that he was quoting) his famous dictum ‘The history of the
world is the World’s court of justice’. But this dictum (at the end of § 340 of the
Phil. of Law; cp. text to note 26) implies a good deal of Hegel’s historicist
political philosophy; not only his worship of success and thus of power, but also
his peculiar moral positivism, and his theory of the reasonableness of history.
The question whether Hegel was influenced by Vico seems to be still open.
(Weber’s German translation of the New Science was published in 1822.)
12
Schopenhauer was an ardent admirer not only of Plato but also of
Heraclitus. He believed that the mob fill their bellies like the beast; he adopted
Bias’ dictum ‘all men are wicked’ as his device; and he believed that a Platonic
aristocracy was the best government. At the same time, he hated nationalism,
and especially German nationalism. He was a cosmopolite. The rather repulsive
expressions of his fear and hatred of the revolutionaries of 1848 can be partly
explained by his apprehension that under ‘mob rules’ he might lose his
independence, and partly by his hatred of the nationalist ideology of the
movement.
13
For Schopenhauer’s suggestion of this motto (taken from Cymbeline, Act
V, Sc. 4) see his Will in Nature (4th ed., 1878), p. 7. The two following
quotations are from his Works (2nd ed., 1888), vol. V, 103 f., and vol. II, p. xvii,
f. (i.e. Preface to the second ed. of the World as Will and Idea; the italics are

mine). I believe that everybody who has studied Schopenhauer must be
impressed by his sincerity and truthfulness. Cp. also the judgement of
Kierkegaard, quoted in the text to notes 19/20 to chapter 25.
14
Schwegler’s first publication (1839) was an essay in memory of Hegel.
The quotation is from his History of Philosophy, transl. by H. Stirling, 7th ed., p.
322.
15
‘To English readers Hegel was first introduced in the powerful statement
of his principles by Dr. Hutchinson Stirling’, writes E. Caird (Hegel, 1883,
Preface, p. vi); which may show that Stirling was taken quite seriously. The
following quotation is from Stirling’s Annotations to Schwegler’s History, p.
429. I may remark that the motto of the present chapter is taken from p. 441 of
the same work.
16
Stirling writes (op. cit., 441): ‘The great thing at last for Hegel was a
good citizen, and for him who was already that, there was to Hegel’s mind no
call for philosophy. Thus he tells a M. Duboc who writes to him about his
difficulties with the system, that, as a good head of a house and father of a
family, possessed of a faith that is firm, he has pretty well enough, and may
consider anything further, in the way of philosophy, for instance, as but .. an
intellectual luxury.’ Thus, according to Stirling, Hegel was not interested in
clearing up a difficulty in his system, but merely in converting ‘bad’ citizens into
‘good’ ones.
17
The following quotation is from Stirling, op. cit., 444 f. Stirling continues
the last sentence quoted in the text: ‘I have gained much from Hegel, and will
always thankfully acknowledge that much, but my position in his regard has
been simply that of one who, in making the unintelligible intelligible, would do
a service to the public.’ And he ends the paragraph by saying: ‘My general aim ..
I conceive to be identical with Hegel’s .. that, namely, of a Christian
philosopher.’
18
Cp., for example, A Textbook of Marxist Philosophy.
19
I take this passage from the most interesting study, Nationalism and the
Cultural Crisis in Prussia, 1806-1815, by E. N. Anderson (1939), p. 270.
Anderson’s analysis is critical of nationalism, and he clearly recognizes the
neurotic and hysterical element in it (cp., for example, p. 6 f.). And yet I cannot
entirely agree with his attitude. Led, I suppose, by the historian’s desire for
objectivity, he seems to me to take the nationalist movement too seriously. I
cannot agree, more particularly, with his condemnation of King Frederick
William for his lack of understanding of the nationalist movement. ‘Frederick
William lacked the capacity for appreciating greatness’, Anderson writes on p.
271, ‘whether in an ideal or in an action. The course into nationalism which the
rising German literature and philosophy opened so brilliantly for others
remained closed to him.’ But by far the best of German literature and philosophy
was anti-nationalistic; Kant and Schopenhauer were both anti-national, and even
Goethe kept away from nationalism; and it is unjustifiable to demand of
anybody, and especially of a simple, candid, conservative like the king, that he
should get excited about Fichte’s windbaggery. Many will fully agree with the
king’s judgement when he spoke (loc. cit.) of ‘eccentric, popular scribbling’.
Although I agree that the king’s conservatism was very unfortunate, I feel the
greatest respect for his simplicity, and his resistance to the wave of nationalist
hysteria.
20
Cp. Selections, xi (J. Loewenberg in the Introduction to the Selections).

21

Cp. notes 19 to chapter 5 and 18 to chapter 11, and text.
For this quotation see Selections, 103 (= WW, iii, 116); for the next one,
see Selections, 130 (= G. W. F. Hegel, Werke, Berlin and Leipzig 1832-1887,
vol. vi, 224). For the last quotation in this paragraph, see Selections, 131 (=
Werke, 1832-1887, vol. vi, 224-5).
23
Cp. Selections, 103 (= WW, iii, 103).
24
Cp. Selections, 128 (= WW, iii, 141).
25
I am alluding to Bergson, and especially to his Creative Evolution. (Engl.
transl. by A. Mitchell, 1913.) It appears that the Hegelian character of this work
is not sufficiently recognized; and, indeed, Bergson’s lucidity and reasoned
presentation of his thought sometimes make it difficult to realize how much his
philosophy depends on Hegel. But if we consider, for example, that Bergson
teaches that the essence is change, or if we read passages like the following (cp.
op. cit., 275 and 278), then there remains little doubt.
‘Essential also is the progress to reflection’, writes Bergson. ‘If our analysis
is correct, it is consciousness, or rather super-consciousness, that is at the origin
of life ... Consciousness corresponds exactly to the living being’s power of
choice; it is co-extensive with the fringe of possible action that surrounds real
action: consciousness is synonymous with invention and with freedom.’ (Italics
mine.) The identification of consciousness (or Spirit) with freedom is the
Hegelian version of Spinoza. This goes so far that theories can be found in
Hegel which I feel inclined to describe as ‘unmistakably Bergsonian’; for
example, ‘The very essence of Spirit is activity; it realizes its potentiality; it
makes itself its own deed, its own work ..’ (Selections, 435 = WW, xi, 113.)
26
Cp. notes 21 to 24 to chapter 11, and text. Another characteristic passage
is this (cp. Selections, 409 = WW, xi, 89): ‘The principle of Development
involves also the existence of a latent germ of being—a capacity or potentiality
striving to realize itself.’—For the quotation later in the paragraph, cp.
Selections, 468 (i.e. Phil. of Law, § 340; see also note 11, above).
27
Considering, on the other hand, that even a second-hand Hegelianism, i.e.
a third- or fourth-hand Fichteanism and Aristotelianism, has often been noisily
acclaimed as an original achievement, it is perhaps a little hard on Hegel to say
that he was unoriginal. (But cp. note 11.)
28
Cp. Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, 2nd ed., p. 514 (top); see also p. 518
(end of section 5); for the motto of my Introduction, see Kant’s letter to
Mendelssohn of April 8th, 1766.
29
Cp. note 53 to chapter 11, and text.
30
It is perhaps reasonable to assume that what one usually calls the ‘spirit of
a language’ is very largely the traditional standard of clarity introduced by the
great writers of that particular language. There are some further traditional
standards in a language, apart from clarity, for example, standards of simplicity,
of ornamentation, of brevity, etc.; but the standard of clarity is perhaps the most
important of them; and it is a cultural inheritance which should be carefully
guarded. Language is one of the most important institutions of social life, and its
clarity is a condition of its functioning as a means of rational communication. Its
use for the communication of emotions is much less important, for we can
communicate a great deal of emotion without saying a word.
* It may be worth saying that Hegel, who had learned from Burke
something about the importance of the historical growth of traditions, did in fact
do much to destroy the intellectual tradition which Kant had founded, both by
22

his doctrine of ‘the cunning of reason’ which reveals itself in passion (see notes
82, 84 and text), and by his actual method of arguing. But he did more. By his
historical relativism—by his theory that truth is relative, dependent on the spirit
of the age—he helped to destroy the tradition of searching for truth, and of
respecting truth. See also the section IV of this chapter, and my paper, Towards
a Rational Theory of Tradition (in The Rationalist Annual, 1949; now in my
Conjectures and Refutations).*
31
Attempts to refute Kant’s Dialectics (his doctrine of Antinomies) seem to
be very rare. Serious criticism attempting to clarify and restate Kant’s arguments
can be found in Schopenhauer’s World as Will and Idea and in J. F. Fries’ New
or Anthropological Critique of Reason, second German ed., 1828, pp. xxiv ff. I
have tried to interpret Kant as holding that mere speculation cannot establish
anything where experience cannot help to weed out false theories. (Cp. Mind,
49, 1940, p. 416; also, Conjectures and Refutations, p. 326 f. In the same
volume of Mind, pp. 204 ff., there is a careful and interesting criticism of Kant’s
argument by M. Fried.) For an attempt to make sense of Hegel’s dialectical
theory of reason as well as of his collectivist interpretation of reason (his
‘objective spirit’), see the analysis of the social or interpersonal aspect of
scientific method in chapter 23, and the corresponding interpretation of ‘reason’
in chapter 24.
32
I have given a detailed justification of this in What is Dialectic? (Mind,
49, pp. 403 ff.; see especially the last sentence on p. 410: also, Conjectures and
Refutations, p. 321). See also a further note under the title, Are Contradictions
Embracing? *This has since appeared in Mind, 52, 1943, pp. 47 ff. After it was
written I received Carnap’s Introduction to Semantics, 1942, where he uses the
term ‘comprehensive’, which seems preferable to ‘embracing’. See especially §
30 of Carnap’s book.*
In What is Dialectic? a number of problems are treated which are only
touched upon in the present book; especially the transition from Kant to Hegel,
Hegel’s dialectics, and his philosophy of identity. Although a few statements
from that paper have been repeated here, the two presentations of the problems
are in the main complementary to one another. Cp. also the next notes, down to
note 36.
33
Cp. Selections, xxviii (the German quotation; for similar quotations see
WW, iv, 618, and Werke 1832-1887, vol. vi, 259). For the idea of a reinforced
dogmatism mentioned in this paragraph, cp. What is Dialectic?, p. 417, and
Conjectures and Refutations, p. 327; see also note 51 to chapter 11.
34
Cp. What is Dialectic? especially from p. 414, where the problem, ‘How
can our mind grasp the world?’ is introduced, down to p. 420 (Conjectures and
Refutations, pp. 325-30).
35
‘Everything actual is an Idea’, says Hegel. Cp. Selections, 103 (= WW, iii,
116); and from the perfection of the Idea, moral positivism follows. See also
Selections, 388 (= WW, xi, 70), i.e. the last passage quoted in the text to note 8;
see, furthermore, § 6 of the Encyclopedia, and the Preface as well as § 270L of
the Philosophy of Right.—I need hardly add that the ‘Great Dictator’ in the
previous paragraph is an allusion to Chaplin’s film.
36
Cp. Selections, 103 (= WW, iii, 116). See also Selections 128 § 107 (=
WW, iii, 142).
Hegel’s philosophy of identity shows, of course, the influence of the mystic
theory of knowledge of Aristotle—the doctrine of the unity of the knowing

subject and the known object. (Cp. notes 33 to chapter 11, 59-70 to chapter 10,
notes 4, 6, and 29-32, and 58, to chapter 24.)
To my remarks in the text about Hegel’s philosophy of identity, it may be
added that Hegel believed, with most of the philosophers of his time, that logic
is the theory of thinking or of reasoning. (See What is Dialectic? p. 418.) This,
together with the philosophy of identity, has the consequence that logic is
considered as the theory of thought, or of reason, or of the Ideas or notions, or of
the Real. From the further premise that thought develops dialectically, Hegel can
deduce that reason, the Ideas or notions, and the Real, all develop dialectically;
and he further gets Logic = Dialectics and Logic = Theory of Reality. This latter
doctrine is known as Hegel’s pan-logism.
On the other hand, Hegel can derive from these premises that notions
develop dialectically, i.e. are capable of a kind of self-creation and selfdevelopment, out of nothing. (Hegel begins this development with the Idea of
Being which presupposes its opposite, i.e. Nothing, and creates the transition
from Nothing to Being, i.e. Becoming.) There are two motives for this attempt
to develop notions out of nothing. The one is the mistaken idea that philosophy
has to start without any presuppositions. (This idea has been recently reaffirmed
by Husserl; it is discussed in chapter 24; cp. note 8 to that chapter, and text.)
This leads Hegel to start from ‘nothing’. The other motive is the hope of giving
a systematic development and justification of Kant’s Table of Categories. Kant
had made the remark that the first two categories of each group are opposed to
each other, and that the third is a kind of synthesis of the first. This remark (and
the influence of Fichte) led Hegel to hope that he could derive all categories
‘dialectically’, out of nothing, and thereby justify the ‘necessity’ of all the
categories.
37
Cp. Selections, xvi ( = Werke, 1832-1887, vi, 153-4).
38
Cp. Anderson, Nationalism, etc., 294.—The king promised the
constitution on May 22, 1815.—The story of the ‘constitution’ and the courtphysician seems to have been told of most of the princes of the period (for
example, of the emperor Francis I as well as his successor Ferdinand I of
Austria).—The next quotation is from Selections, 246 f. (= Encycl. 1870, pp.
437-8).
39
Cp. Selections, 248 f. (= Encycl. 1870, pp. 437-8; italics partly mine).
40
Cp. note 25 to chapter 11.
41
For the paradox of freedom, cp. note 43 (1) below; the four paragraphs in
the text before note 42 to chapter 6; notes 4 and 6 to chapter 7, and note 7 to
chapter 24; and the passages in the text. (See also note 20 to chapter 17.) For
Rousseau’s restatement of the paradox of freedom, cp. the Social Contract,
Book I, chapter VIII, second paragraph. For Kant’s solution, cp. note 4 to
chapter 6. Hegel frequently alludes to this Kantian solution (cp. Kant’s
Metaphysics of Morals, Introduction to the Theory of Law, § C; Works, ed. by
Cassirer, VII, p. 31); for example in his Philosophy of Law, § 29; and§ 270,
where, following Aristotle and Burke (cp. note 43 to chapter 6 and text), Hegel
argues against the theory (due to Lycophron and Kant) that ‘the state’s specific
function consists in the protection of everybody’s life, property, and caprice’, as
he sneeringly puts it.
For the two quotations at the beginning and end of this paragraph, cp.
Selections, 248 f., and 249 (= Encycl. 1870, p. 439).
42
For the quotations, cp. Selections, 250 (= Encycl. 1870, pp. 440-41).

43

(1) For the following quotations, cp. Selections, 251 (§ 540 = Encycl.
1870, p. 441); 251 f., (first sentence of § 541 = Encycl. 1870, p. 442); and 253 f.
(beginning of § 542, italics partly mine = Encycl. 1870, p. 443). These are the
passages from the Encyclopedia. The ‘parallel passage’ from the Philosophy of
Law is: § 273 (last paragraph) to § 281. The two quotations are from § 275, and
from § 279, end of first paragraph (italics mine). For a similarly dubious use of
the paradox of freedom, cp. Selections, 394 (= WW, xi, 76): ‘If the principle of
regard for the individual will is recognized as the only basis of political liberty ..
then we have, properly speaking, no Constitution: See also Selections, 400 f. (=
WW, xi, 80-81), and 449 (sec the Philosophy of Law, § 274).
Hegel himself summarizes his twist (Selections, 401 = WW, xi, 82): ‘At an
earlier stage of the discussion, we established .. first, the Idea of Freedom as the
absolute and final aim ... We then recognized the State as the moral Whole and
the Reality of Freedom ..’ Thus we begin with freedom and end with the
totalitarian state. One can hardly present the twist more cynically.
(2) For another example of a dialectic twist, viz., that of reason into passion
and violence, see end of (g) in section IV, below, of the present chapter (text to
note 84). Particularly interesting in this connection is Hegel’s criticism of Plato.
(See also notes 7 and 8 above, and text.) Hegel, paying lip-service to all modern
and ‘Christian’ values, not only to freedom, but even to the ‘subjective freedom’
of the individual, criticizes Plato’s holism or collectivism (Phil. of Law, § 187):
‘The principle of the self-sufficient .. personality of the individual, the principle
of subjective freedom, is denied its right by .. Plato. This principle dawned .. in
the Christian religion and .. in the Roman World.’ This criticism is excellent,
and it proves that Hegel knew what Plato was about; in fact, Hegel’s reading of
Plato agrees very well with my own. For the untrained reader of Hegel, this
passage might even prove the injustice of branding Hegel as a collectivist. But
we have only to turn to § 70L of the same work in order to see that Plato’s most
radical collectivist saying, ‘You are created for the sake of the whole, and not
the whole for the sake of you’, is fully subscribed to by Hegel, who writes: ‘A
single person, it hardly needs saying, is something subordinate, and as such he
must dedicate himself to the ethical whole’, i.e. the state. This is Hegel’s
‘individualism’.
But why, then, does he criticize Plato? Why does he emphasize the
importance of ‘subjective freedom’? §§ 316 and 317 of the Philosophy of Law
give an answer to this question. Hegel is convinced that revolutions can be
avoided only by granting the people, as a kind of safety valve, a certain small
amount of freedom which should not go beyond an irrelevant opportunity to
give vent to their feelings. Thus he writes (op. cit., §§316, 317L, italics mine):
‘In our day .. the principle of subjective freedom is of great importance and
significance ... Everybody wishes to participate in discussions and deliberations.
But once he has had his say,.. his subjectivity is gratified and he will put up with
a lot. In France, freedom of speech has proved far less dangerous than silence
imposed by force; with the latter .. men have to swallow everything, while if
they are permitted to argue, they have an outlet as well as some satisfaction; and
in this way, a thing may be pushed ahead more easily.’ It must be difficult to
surpass the cynicism exhibited by this discussion in which Hegel gives vent, so
freely, to his feeling concerning ‘subjective freedom’ or, as he often calls it so
solemnly, ‘the principle of the modern world’.

To sum up. Hegel agrees with Plato completely, except that he criticizes
Plato’s failure to provide the ruled with the illusion of ‘subjective freedom’.
44
The astonishing thing is that these despicable services could be
successful, that even serious people have been deceived by Hegel’s dialectical
method. As an example it may be mentioned that even such a critical and
enlightened fighter for freedom and reason as C. E. Vaughan fell a victim to
Hegel’s hypocrisy, when he expressed his belief in Hegel’s ‘belief in freedom
and progress which, on Hegel’s own showing, is .. the essence of his creed’. (Cp
C. E. Vaughan, Studies in the History of Political Philosophy, vol. II, 296; italics
mine.) It must be admitted that Vaughan criticized Hegel’s ‘undue leaking
towards the established order’ (p. 178); he even said of Hegel that ‘no one could
.. be more ready .. to assure the world that the most retrograde and oppressive
institutions .. must .. be accepted as indisputably rational’ (p. 295)! Yet he
trusted ‘Hegel’s own showing’ so much that he took features of this kind as
mere ‘extravagances’ (p. 295), as ‘shortcomings for which it is easy to allow’ (p.
182). Moreover, his strongest and perfectly justified comment, that Hegel
‘discovers the last word of political wisdom, the coping stone .. of history, in the
Prussian Constitution’ (p. 182), was not fated to be published without an
antidote restoring the reader’s confidence in Hegel; for the editor of Vaughan’s
posthumous Studies destroys the force of Vaughan’s comment by adding in a
foot-note, with reference to a passage from Hegel which he assumes to be the
one alluded to by Vaughan (he does not refer to the passage quoted here in the
text to notes 47, 48, and 49), ‘but perhaps the passage hardly justifies the
comment ..’
45
See note 36 to this chapter. An indication of this dialectical theory may be
found as early as in Aristotle’s Physics, I, 5.
46
I am greatly indebted to E. H. Gombrich, who permitted me to adopt the
main ideas of this paragraph from his excellent criticism of my presentation of
Hegel (communicated to me by letter).
For Hegel’s view that ‘the Absolute Spirit manifests itself in the history of
the world’, see his Philosophy of Law, § 259L. For his identification of the
‘Absolute Spirit’ with the ‘World Spirit’, see op. cit., § 339L. For the view that
perfection is the aim of Providence, and for Hegel’s attack on the (Kantian) view
that the plan of Providence is inscrutable, see op. cit., § 343. (For M. B. Foster’s
interesting counter-attacks, see note 19 to chapter 25.) For Hegel’s use of
(dialectical) syllogisms, see especially the Encyclopedia, § 181 (‘the syllogism
is the rational, and everything rational’); § 198, where the state is described as a
triad of syllogisms; and §§ 575 to 577, where Hegel’s whole system is presented
as such a triad of syllogisms. According to this last passage, we might infer that
‘history’ is the realm of the ‘second syllogism’ (§ 576); cp. Selections, 309 f.
For the first passage (from section III of the Introduction to the Philosophy of
History), see Selections, 348 f.—For the next passage (from the Encyclopedia)
see Selections, 262 f.
47
Cp. Selections, 442 (last paragraph = WW, xi, 119-20). The last quotation
in this paragraph is from the same place.
Concerning the three steps, cp. Selections, 360, 362, 398 (= WW, xi, 44, 46,
79-80). See also Hegel’s Philosophy of History (transl. by J. Sibree, 1857,
quoted from the edition of 1914), p. no: ‘The East knew .. only that One is free;
the Greek and the Roman World, that some are free; the German World knows

that All are free. The first political form therefore which we observe in History is
Despotism, the second Democracy and Aristocracy, the third Monarchy.’
(For the further treatment of the three steps, cp. op. cit., pp. 117, 260, 354.)
48
For the next three quotations cp. Hegel’s Philosophy of History, 429;
Selections, 358, 359 (= WW, xi, 43-44).
The presentation in the text simplifies the matter somewhat; for Hegel first
divides (Phil. of Hist., 356 ff.) the Germanic World into three periods which he
describes (p. 358) as the ‘Kingdoms of the Father, the Son and the Spirit’; and
the kingdom of the Spirit is again subdivided into the three periods mentioned in
the text.
49
For the following three passages, cp. the Philosophy of History, pp. 354,
476, 476-7.
50
See especially text to note 75 to this chapter.
51
Cp. especially notes 48-50 to chapter 8.
52
Cp. Hegel’s Philosophy of History, p. 418. (The translator writes:
‘Germanized Sclaves’.)
53
Masaryk has been described sometimes as a ‘philosopher king’. But he
was certainly not a ruler of the kind Plato would have liked; for he was a
democrat. He was very interested in Plato, but he idealized Plato and interpreted
him democratically. His nationalism was a reaction to national oppression, and
he always fought against nationalist excesses. It may be mentioned that his first
printed work in the Czech language was an article on Plato’s patriotism. (Cp. K.
Capek’s biography of Masaryk, the chapter on his period as a University
student.) Masaryk’s Czechoslovakia was probably one of the best and most
democratic states that ever existed; but in spite of all that, it was built on the
principle of the national state, on a principle which in this world is inapplicable.
An international federation in the Danube basin might have prevented much.
54
See chapter 7. For the quotation from Rousseau, later in the paragraph,
cp. the Social Contract, book I, ch. VII (end of second paragraph). For Hegel’s
view concerning the doctrine of the sovereignty of the people, see the passage
from § 279 of the Philosophy of Law quoted in text to note 61 to this chapter.
55
Cp. Herder, quoted by Zimmern, Modern Political Doctrines (1939), p.
165f. (The passage quoted in my text is not characteristic of Herder’s empty
verbalism, which was criticized by Kant.)
56
Cp. note 7 to chapter 9.
For the two quotations from Kant, further on in this paragraph, cp, Works
(ed. by E. Cassirer). vol. IV, p. 179; and p. 195.
57
Cp. Fichte’s Briefwechsel (ed. Schulz, 1925), II, p. 100. The letter is
partly quoted by Anderson, Nationalism, etc., p. 30. (Cp. also Hegemann,
Entlarvte Geschichte, and ed., 1934, p. 118.)—The next quotation is from
Anderson, op. cit., p. 34 f.—For the quotations in the next paragraph, cp. op.
cit., 36 f.; italics mine.
It may be remarked that an originally anti-German feeling is common to
many of the founders of German nationalism; which shows how far nationalism
is based upon a feeling of inferiority. (Cp. notes 61 and 70 to this chapter.) As
an example, Anderson says (op. cit., 79) about E. M. Arndt, later a famous
nationalist: ‘When Arndt travelled through Europe in 1798-9, he called himself a
Swede because, as he said, the name German “stinks in the world”; not, he
added characteristically, through the fault of the common people.’ Hegemann
insists rightly (op. cit., 118) that the German spiritual leaders of the time turned

especially against the barbarism of Prussia, and he quotes Winckelmann, who
said, ‘I would rather be a Turkish eunuch than a Prussian’; and Lessing, who
said, ‘Prussia is the most slavish country in Europe’; and he refers to Goethe,
who passionately hoped that relief would come from Napoleon. And Hegemann,
who is also the author of a book against Napoleon, adds: ‘Napoleon was a
despot;.. whatever we have to say against him, it must be admitted that by his
victory of Jena he had forced the reactionary state of Frederick to introduce a
few reforms that had been long overdue.’
An interesting judgement on the Germany of 1800 can be found in Kant’s
Anthropology (1800), where he deals, not quite seriously, with national
characteristics. Kant writes (Works, vol. VIII, 213, 211, 212; italics mine) of the
German ‘His bad side is the compulsion to imitate others and his low opinion of
himself with respect to his own originality ..; and especially a certain pedantic
inclination to classify himself painstakingly in relation to other citizens,
according to a system of rank and of prerogatives. In this system of rank, he is
inexhaustible in the invention of titles, and thus slavish out of pedantry ... Of all
civilized peoples, the German submits most easily and most lastingly to the
government under which he happens to live, and he is further removed than any
other from a love of change and from resistance to the established order. His
character is a kind of phlegmatic reason.’
58
Cp. Kant’s Works, vol. VIII, 516. Kant, who had been immediately ready
to help when Fichte appealed to him as an unknown author in distress, hesitated
for seven years after the anonymous publication of Fichte’s first book to speak
his mind about Fichte, although he was pressed to do so from various sides, for
example by Fichte himself, who posed as the fulfiller of the Kantian promise.
Ultimately, Kant published his Public Explanation Regarding Fichte, as a reply
‘to the solemn demand made by a reviewer in the name of the public’, that he
should speak his mind. He declared that, in his view, ‘Fichte’s system was
totally untenable’; and he declined to have anything to do with a philosophy
which consisted of barren subtleties’. And after praying (as quoted in the text)
that God may protect us from our friends, Kant goes on to say: ‘For there may
be also .. fraudulent and perfidious friends who are scheming for our ruin,
although they speak the language of benevolence; one cannot be sufficiently
cautious in order to avoid the traps they set for us.’ If Kant, a most balanced,
benevolent, and conscientious person, was moved to say things such as these,
then we have every reason to consider his judgement seriously. But I have seen
so far no history of philosophy which clearly states that, in Kant’s opinion,
Fichte was a dishonest impostor; although I have seen many histories of
philosophy that try to explain away Schopenhauer’s indictments, for example,
by hinting that he was envious.
But Kant’s and Schopenhauer’s accusations are by no means isolated. A.
von Feuerbach (in a letter of January 30th, 1799; cp. Schopenhauer’s Works,
vol. V, 102) expressed himself as strongly as Schopenhauer; Schiller arrived at a
similar opinion, and so did Goethe; and Nicolovius called Fichte a ‘sycophant
and a deceiver’. (Cp. also Hegemann, op. cit., pp. 119 ff.)
It is astonishing to see that, thanks to a conspiracy of noise, a man like
Fichte succeeded in perverting the teaching of his ‘master’, in spite of Kant’s
protests, and in Kant’s lifetime. This happened only a hundred years ago and can
easily be checked by anybody who takes the trouble to read Kant’s and Fichte’s
letters, and Kant’s public announcements; and it shows that my theory of Plato’s

perversion of the teaching of Socrates is by no means so fantastic as it may
appear to Platonists. Socrates was dead then, and he had left no letters. (Were
the comparison not one that does too much honour to Fichte and Hegel, one
would be tempted to say: without Plato, there could have been no Aristotle; and
without Fichte, no Hegel.)
59
Cp. Anderson, op. cit., p. 13.
60
Cp. Hegel’s Philosophy of History, 465. See also Philosophy of Law, §
258. With Pareto’s advice, cp. note 1 to chapter 13.
61
Cp. Philosophy of Law, § 279; for the next quotation, see Selections, 256
f. (= Encycl. 1870, p. 446). The attack upon England, further below in the
paragraph, follows on p. 257 (= Encycl. 1870, p. 447). For Hegel’s reference to
the German empire, cp. Philosophy of History, p. 475 (see also note 77 to this
chapter).—Feelings of inferiority, especially in relation to England, and clever
appeals to such feelings, play a considerable part in the story of the rise of
nationalism; cp. also notes 57 and 70 to this chapter. For other passages on
England, see the next note and note 70 to this chapter, and text. (The words ‘arts
and science’ are italicized by me.)
62
Hegel’s disparaging reference to merely ‘formal’ rights, to merely
‘formal’ freedom, to a merely ‘formal’ constitution, etc., is interesting, since it is
the dubious source of the modern Marxist criticism of merely ‘formal’
democracies which offer merely ‘formal’ freedom. Cp. note 19 to chapter 17 and
text.
A few characteristic passages in which Hegel denounces merely ‘formal’
freedom, etc., may be quoted here. They are all taken from the Philosophy of
History—(p. 471): ‘Liberalism sets up, in opposition to all this ‘(i.e. to the
Prussian ‘holistic’ restoration), ‘the atomistic principle which insists upon the
sway of individual wills, maintaining that all governments should .. have their’
(the people’s) ‘explicit sanction. In thus asserting the formal side of Freedom—
this mere abstraction—the party in question makes it impossible firmly to
establish any political organization.’—(p. 474): ‘The Constitution of England is
a complex of mere particular rights and particular privileges,.. Of institutions
characterized by real freedom’ (as opposed to merely formal freedom) ‘there are
nowhere fewer than in England. In point of private rights and the freedom of
possessions they present an incredible deficiency: sufficient proof of which is
afforded in the rights of primogeniture which make it necessary to provide (by
purchase or otherwise) military or ecclesiastical appointments for the younger
sons of the aristocracy.’ See further the discussion of the French declaration of
the Rights of Man and Kant’s principles on pp. 462 ff. with its reference to
‘nothing more than formal Will’ and the ‘principle of Freedom’ that ‘remained
merely formal’; and contrast this, for example, with the remarks on p. 354,
which show that the German Spirit is ‘true’ and ‘absolute’ freedom: ‘The
German Spirit is the Spirit of the new World. Its aim is the realization of
absolute Truth as the unlimited self-determination of Freedom; of that Freedom
which has its own absolute form itself as its purport.’ If I were to use the term
‘formal freedom’ in a disparaging sense, then I should apply it to Hegel’s
‘subjective freedom’, as treated by him in Philosophy of Law, § 317L, (quoted at
the end of note 43).
63
Cp. Anderson, Nationalism, etc., p. 279. For Hegel’s reference to England
(quoted in brackets at the end of this paragraph), cp. Selections, 263 ( = Encycl.
1870, p. 452); see also note 70 to this chapter.

64

This quotation is from the Philosophy of Law, § 331. For the following
two quotations, cp. Selections, 403 (= WW, xi, 84) and 267 f. (= Encycl. 1870,
pp. 455-56). For the quotation further below (illustrating juridical positivism),
cp. Selections, 449 (i.e. Phil. of Law, § 274). With the theory of world dominion,
cp. also the theory of domination and submission, and of slavery, outlined in
note 25 to chapter 11, and text. For the theory of national spirits or wills or
geniuses asserting themselves in history, i.e. in the history of wars see text to
notes 69 and 77.
In connection with the historical theory of the nation, cp. the following
remarks of Renan (quoted by A. Zimmern in Modern Political Doctrines, p. 190
f.): ‘To forget and—I will venture to say—to get one’s history wrong, are
essential factors in the making of a nation [or, as we now know, of a totalitarian
state]; and thus the advance of historical studies is often a danger to nationality
... Now it is of the essence of a nation that all individuals should have much in
common, and further that they should all have forgotten much.’ One would
hardly believe that Renan is a nationalist; but he is, although one of the
democratic type; and his nationalism is typically Hegelian; for he writes (p.
202): ‘A nation is a soul, a spiritual principle.’
65
Haeckel can hardly be taken seriously as a philosopher or scientist. He
called himself a free thinker, but his thinking was not sufficiently independent to
prevent him from demanding in 1914 ‘the following fruits of victory’: ‘(1)
Emancipation from England’s tyranny. (2) the invasion of the British pirate state
by the German navy and army; the capture of London; (3) the partitioning of
Belgium’; and so forth for quite a time. (In: Das Monistische Jahrhundert, 1914,
No. 31/32, pp. 65 f, quoted in Thus Spake Germany, 270.)
W. Schallmayer’s prize essay has the title: Heredity and Selection in the
Life of the Nations. (See also note 71 to chapter 10, above.)
66
For Bergson’s Hegelianism. cp. note 25 to this chapter. For Shaw’s
characterization of the religion of creative evolution, cp. Back to Methuselah the
last section of the Preface (‘My Own Part in The Matter’): ‘. . as the conception
of Creative Evolution developed, I saw that we were at last within reach of a
faith which complied with the first condition of all the religions that have ever
taken hold of humanity: namely that it must be, first and fundamentally, a
science of metabiology.”
67
Cp. A. Zimmern’s excellent Introduction to his Modern Political
Doctrines, p. xviii.—Regarding Platonic totalitarianism, cp. text to note 8 to this
chapter. For the theory of master and slave, and of domination and submission,
cp. note 25 to chapter 11; see also note 74 to the present chapter.
68
Cp. Schopenhauer, Grundprobleme, p. xix.
69
For the eight quotations in this paragraph, cp. Selections, 265, 402, 403,
435, 436, 399, 407, 267 f. (= Encycl. 1870, p. 453, WW, xi, 83, 84, 113-4. 81,
88, Encycl. pp. 455-6). Cp. also § 347 of the Philosophy of Law.
70
Cp. Selections, 435 f. (= WW, xi, 114). For the problem of inferiority, cp.
also notes 57 and 61 to this chapter, and text. For the other passage on England,
see notes 61-63, and text to this chapter. A very interesting passage (Phil. of
Law, § 290L) containing a classical formulation of holism shows that Hegel not
only thought in terms of holism or collectivism and power, but also that he saw
the applicability of these principles towards the organization of the proletariat.
‘The lower classes’, Hegel writes, ‘have been left more or less unorganized. And
yet, it is of the utmost importance that they should be organized, for only in this

way can they become powerful. Without organization, they are nothing but a
heap, an aggregate of atoms.’ Hegel comes pretty close to Marx in this passage.
71
The passage is from H. Freyer, Pallas Athene (1935), quoted by A.
Kolnai, The War against the West (1938), p. 417. I am greatly indebted to
Kolnai’s book, which has made it possible for me to quote in the remaining part
of this chapter a considerable number of authors who would otherwise have
been inaccessible to me. (I have, however, not always followed the wording of
Kolnai’s translations.)
For the characterization of Freyer as one of the leading sociologists of
contemporary Germany, cp. F. A. von Hayek, Freedom and the Economic
System (Public Policy Pamphlet No. 29, 2nd impression, 1940), p. 30.
For the four passages in this paragraph from Hegel’s Philosophy of Law, §§
331, 340, 342L (cp. also 331 f.) and 340, see Selections, 466, 467, 465, 468. For
the passages from the Encyclopedia, cp. Selections, 260 f. (= Encycl. 1870, pp.
449-50). (The last sentence quoted is a different version of the first sentence of §
546.)
For the passage from H. von Treitschke, cp. Thus Spake Germany (1941), p.
60.
72
Cp. Philosophy of Law, § 257, i.e. Selections, 443. For the next three
quotations, see Philosophy of Law, §§ 334 and 339L, i.e. Selections, 467. For the
last quotation in this paragraph, cp. Hegel’s Philosophy of Law, §§ 330L and
333.
73
Cp. Selections, 365 (= WW, xi, 49); italics partly mine. For the next
quotation, cp. Selections, 468, i.e. Philosophy of Law, § 340.
74
Quoted by Kolnai, op. cit., 418.—For Heraclitus, cp. text to note 10 to
chapter 2.—For Haiser, see Kolnai, loc. cit.; cp. also Hegel’s theory of slavery,
mentioned in note 25 to chapter 11.—For the concluding quotation of this
paragraph, cp. Selections, 467, i.e. Philosophy of Law, 334. For the ‘war of
defence’ that turns into a ‘war of conquest’, see op. cit., § 326.
75
For all the passages from Hegel in this paragraph, cp. Selections, 426 f. (=
WW, xi, 105-6). (Italics mine.) For another passage expressing the postulate that
world-history must overrule morals, see the Philosophy of Law, § 345. For E.
Meyer, cp. end of note 15 (2) to chapter 10.
76
See Philosophy of Law, § 317 f.; cp. Selections, 461; for similar passages,
see § 316: Public opinion as it exists is a continuous self-contradiction’; see also
§ 301, i.e. Selections, 456, and § 318L. (For further views of Hegel on public
opinion, cp. also text to note 84 to this chapter.)—For Haiser’s remark, cp.
Kolnai, op. cit., 234.
77
Cp. Selections, 464, 465, for the passages from the Philosophy of Law, §§
324 and 324L. For the next passages from the Philosophy of History, cp.
Selections, 436 f. (= WW, xi, 114-5). (The next passage quoted continues
characteristically: ‘... naturally dead in itself, as e.g. the German Imperial Cities,
the German Imperial Constitution.’ With this, cp. note 61 to this chapter, and
text.)
78
Cp. Philosophy of Law, §§ 327L and 328, i.e. Selections, 465 f. (Italics
mine.) For the remark on gunpowder, cp. Hegel’s Philosophy of History, p. 419.
79
For the quotations from Kaufmann, Banse, Ludendorff, Scheler, Freyer,
Lenz, and Jung, cp. Kolnai, op. cit., 411, 411 f., 412, 411, 417, 411, and 420.—
For the quotation from J. G. Fichte’s Addresses to the German Nation (1808),
cp. the German edition of 1871 (edited by I. H. Fichte), p. 49 f.; see also A.

Zimmern, Modern Political Doctrines, 170 f.—For Spengler’s repetition, see his
Decline of the West, I, p. 12; for Rosenberg’s repetition, cp. his Myth of the
Twentieth Century (1935), p. 143; see also my note 50 to chapter 8, and Rader,
No Compromise (1939), 116.
80
Cp. Kolnai, op. cit., 412.
81
Cp. Caird, Hegel (1883), p. 26.
82
Kolnai, op. cit., 438.—for the passages from Hegel, cp. Selections, 365 f.,
italics partly mine; cp. also text to note 84 to this chapter. For E. Krieck, cp.
Kolnai, op. cit., 65 f., and E. Krieck, National-Political Education (in German,
1932, p. 1; quoted in Thus Spake Germany, p. 53).
83
Cp. Selections, 268 (= Encycl. 1870, p. 456); for Stapel, cp. Kolnai, op.
cit., 292 f.
84
For Rosenberg, cp. Kolnai, op. cit., 295. For Hegel’s views on public
opinion, cp. also text to note 76 to this chapter; for the passages quoted in the
present paragraph, see Philosophy of Law, § 318L, i.e. Selections, pp. 461
(italics mine), 375, 377, 377, 378, 367/368, 380, 368, 364, 388, 380 (= WW, xi,
59, 60, 60, 60-61, 51-2, 63, 52, 48, 70-1, 63). (Italics partly mine.) For Hegel’s
eulogy of emotion and passion and self-interest, cp. also text to note 82 to this
chapter.
85
For Best, cp. Kolnai, op. cit., 414 f.—For the quotations from Hegel, cp.
Selections, 464 f., 464, 465, 437 (= WW, xi, 115, a noteworthy similarity to
Bergson), 372. (The passages from Phil. of Law are from §§ 324, 324L,
327L.)—For the remark on Aristotle, cp. Pol., VII, 15, 3 (1334a).
86
For Stapel, cp. Kolnai, op. cit., 255-257.
87
Cp. Selections, p. 100: ‘If I neglect all the determinations of an object,
then nothing remains.’—For Heidegger’s What is Metaphysics? cp. Carnap,
Erkenntnis, 2, 229. For Heidegger’s relation to Husserl and Scheler, cp. J. Kraft,
From Husserl to Heidegger (2nd German ed., 1957). Heidegger recognizes that
his sentences arc; meaningless: ‘Question and answer concerning nothingness
are in themselves equally nonsensical’, Heidegger writes (cp. Erkenntnis, 2,
231). What could be said, from the point of view of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus,
against this kind of philosophy which admits that it talks nonsense—but deeply
significant nonsense? (Cp. note 51 (1) to chapter 11.) G. Schneeberger, Nachlese
zu Heidegger, 1962, contains a collection of documents on Heidegger’s political
activity.
88
For these quotations from Heidegger, cp. Kolnai, op. cit., 221, 313.—For
Schopenhauer’s advice to the guardian, cp. Works, vol. V, p. 25 (note).
89
For Jaspers, cp. Kolnai, op. cit., 270 f. Kolnai (p. 282) calls Jaspers
‘Heidegger’s lesser brother’. I cannot agree with that. For, as opposed to
Heidegger, Jaspers has undoubtedly written books which contain much of
interest, even books which contain much that is based on experience, for
instance his General Psycho-Pathology. But I may quote here a few passages
from an early work, his Psychology of World-Views (first published in 1919; I
quote from the third German ed., 1925), which show that Jaspers’ world-views
were far advanced, at any rate, before Heidegger took to writing. ‘To visualize
the life of man, one would have to see how he lives in the Moment. The Moment
is the sole reality, it is reality in itself, in the life of the soul. The Moment that
has been lived is the Last, the Warm-Blooded, the Immediate, the Living, the
Bodily-Present, the Totality of the Real, the only Concrete Thing ... Man finds
Existence and the Absolute ultimately in the Moment alone.’ (p. 112.)—(From

the chapter on the Enthusiastic Altitude, p. 112): ‘Wherever Enthusiasm is the
absolute leading motive, i.e. wherever one lives in Reality and for Reality, and
still dares and risks all, there one may well speak of Heroism: of heroic Love,
heroic Strife, heroic Work, etc. § 5. The Enthusiastic Attitude is Love ..’—
(Subsection 2, p. 128): ‘Compassion is not Love ..’—(p. 127): ‘This is why Love
is cruel, ruthless; and why it is believed in, by the genuine Lover, only if it is
so.’—(pp. 256 ff.): ‘III. Single Marginal Situations ... (A) Strife. Strife is a
fundamental form of all Existence ... The reactions to the Marginal Situations of
Strife are the following:.. 2. Man’s lack of understanding of the fact that Strife is
Ultimate: He skulks. .’ And so on. We always find the same picture: A
hysterical romanticism, combined with a brutal barbarism and the professorial
pedantry of sub-sections and sub-sub-sections.
90
Cp. Kolnai, op. cit., 208.
For my remark on the ‘philosophy of the gambler’, cp. O. Spengler (The
Hour of Decision. Germany and World-Historical Evolution.—German ed.,
1933, p. 230; quoted in Thus Spake Germany, 28): ‘He whose sword compels
victory here will be lord of the world. The dice are there, ready for this
stupendous game. Who dares to throw them?’
Of the gangster philosophy, a book by the very talented author, E. von
Salomon, is perhaps even more characteristic. I quote a few passages from this
book, The Outlaws (1930; the passages quoted are from pp. 105, 73, 63, 307, 73,
367): ‘Satanic lust! Am I not one with my gun?.. The first lust of man is
destruction ... They shot quite indiscriminately, just because it was good fun ...
We are free of the burden of plan, method or system ... What we wanted we did
not know, and what we knew we did not want ... My greatest lust was always for
destruction.’ And so on. (Cp. also Hegemann, op. cit., 171.)
91
Cp. Kolnai, op. cit., 313.
92
For Ziegler, cp. Kolnai, op. cit., 398.
93
This quotation is from Schopenhauer, Grundprobleme (4th ed., 1890),
Introduction to the first edition (1840), p. xix.—Hegel’s remark on ‘the most
lofty depth’ (or ‘the most elevated depth’) is from the Jahrbücher d. wiss. Lit.,
1827, No. 7; it is quoted by Schopenhauer, op. cit.—The concluding quotation is
from Schopenhauer, op. cit., xviii.

Notes To Chapter 13
General Note to the Chapters on Marx. Wherever possible, I refer in these
notes to Capital or to H.o.M. or to both. I use Capital as abbreviation for the
Everyman Double Volume Edition of K. Marx. Capital, translated by E. and C.
Paul.—H.o.M. stands for A Handbook of Marxism, edited by E. Burns, 1935, but
references to complete editions of the texts have always been added. For
quotations from Marx and Engels, I refer to the Moscow standard edition
(Gesamtausgabe, abbreviated GA), published from 1927 onwards and edited by
D. Ryazanow and others but still incomplete. For quotations from Lenin, I refer
to the Little Lenin Library, published by Martin Lawrence, later Lawrence and
Wishart, abbreviated L.L.L. The later volumes of Capital are quoted as Das
Kapital (of which vol. I was first published in 1867); the references are to vol.
II, 1885, or to vol. III. part i, and vol. III, part 2 (quoted as III/1 and III/2), both
1894. I wish to make it quite clear that although I refer where possible to the
translations mentioned above, I do not always adopt their wording.

1

Cp. V. Pareto, Treatise on General Sociology, § 1843. (English transl.:
The Mind and Society, 1935, vol. III, p. 1281; cp. also text to note 65 to chapter
10.) Pareto writes (p. 1281 f.): ‘The art of government lies in finding ways to
take advantage of such sentiments, not wasting one’s energy in futile efforts to
destroy them; very frequently the sole effect of the latter course is to strengthen
them. The person capable of freeing himself from the blind domination of his
own sentiments will be able to utilize the sentiments of other people for his own
end;. .. This may be said in general of the relation between ruler and ruled. The
statesman who is of greatest service to himself and to his party is the man
without prejudice who knows how to profit by the prejudices of others.’ The
prejudices Pareto has in mind are of diverse character—nationalism, love of
freedom, humanitarianism. And it may be just as well to remark that Pareto,
though he has freed himself from many prejudices, has certainly not succeeded
in freeing himself from all of them. This can be seen in nearly every page he
writes, especially, of course, where he speaks of what he describes not
inappropriately as ‘the humanitarian religion’. His own prejudice is the antihumanitarian religion. Had he seen that his choice was not between prejudice
and freedom from prejudice, but only between the humanitarian prejudice and
the anti-humanitarian prejudice, he might perhaps have felt a little less confident
of his superiority. (For the problem of prejudices, cp. note 8 (1) to chapter 24,
and text.)
Pareto’s ideas concerning the ‘art of government’ are very old; they go back
at least to Plato’s uncle Critias, and have played their part in the Platonic school
tradition (as pointed out in note 18 to chapter 8).
2
(1) Fichte’s and Hegel’s ideas led to the principle of the national state and
of national self-determination, a reactionary principle in which, however, a
fighter for the open society such as Masaryk sincerely believed, and which the
democrat Wilson adopted. (For Wilson, cp. for instance Modern Political
Doctrines, ed. by A. Zimmern, 1939, pp. 223 ff.) This principle is obviously
inapplicable on this earth, and especially in Europe, where the nations (i.e.
linguistic groups) are so densely packed that it is quite impossible to disentangle
them. The terrible effect of Wilson’s attempt to apply this romantic principle to
European politics should be clear by now to everybody. That the Versailles
settlement was harsh, is a myth; that Wilson’s principles were not adhered to, is
another myth. The fact is that such principles could not be more consistently
applied; and Versailles failed mainly because of the attempt to apply Wilson’s
inapplicable principles. (For all this, cp. note 7 to chapter 9, and text to notes 5164 to chapter 12.)
(2) In connection with the Hegelian character of Marxism mentioned in the
text in this paragraph, I give here a list of important views which Marxism takes
over from Hegelianism. My treatment of Marx is not based on this list, since I
do not intend to treat him just as another Hegelian, but rather as a serious
investigator who can, and must, answer for himself. This is the list, ordered
approximately according to the importance of the various view’s for Marxism.
(a) Historicism: The method of a science of society is the study of history,
and especially of the tendencies inherent in the historical development of
mankind.
(b) Historical relativism: What is a law in one historical period need not be
a law in another historical period. (Hegel maintained that what is true in one
period need not be true in another.)

(c) There is an inherent law of progress in historical development.
(d) The development is one towards more freedom and reason, although the
instrumentality of bringing this about is not our reasonable planning but rather
such irrational forces as our passions and our self-interests. (Hegel calls this ‘the
cunning of reason’.)
(e) Moral positivism, or in Marx’s case, moral ‘futurism’. (This term is
explained in chapter 22.)
(f) Class consciousness is one of the instruments by which the development
propels itself. (Hegel operates with the consciousness of the nation, the ‘national
Spirit’ or ‘national Genius’.)
(g) Methodological essentialism. Dialectics.
(h) The following Hegelian ideas play a part in Marx’s writings but have
become more important with later Marxists.
(h1) The distinction between merely ‘formal’ freedom or merely ‘formal’
democracy and ‘real’ or ‘economic’ freedom or ‘economic’ democracy, etc.; in
connection with this, there is a certain ‘ambivalent’ attitude towards liberalism,
i.e. a mixture of love and hate.
(h2) Collectivism.
In the following chapters, (a) is again the main theme. In connection with
(a) and (b), see also note 13 to this chapter. For (b), cp. chapters 22-24. For (c),
cp. chapters 22 and 25. For (d), cp. chapter 22 (and regarding Hegel’s ‘cunning
of reason’, cp. text to note 84 to chapter 12). For (f), cp. chapters 16 and 19. For
(g), cp. notes 4 to the present chapter, 6 to chapter 17, 13 to chapter 15, 15 to
chapter 19, and notes 20-24 to chapter 20, and text. For (h1), cp. note 19 to
chapter 17. (h2) has its influence on Marx’s anti-psychologism (cp. text to note
16 to chapter 14); it is under the influence of the Platonic-Hegelian doctrine of
the superiority of the state over the individual that Marx develops his theory that
even the ‘consciousness’ of the individual is determined by social conditions.
Yet, fundamentally, Marx was an individualist; his main interest was to help
suffering human individuals. Thus collectivism as such certainly does not play
an important part in Marx’s own writings. (Apart from his emphasis upon a
collective class consciousness, mentioned under (f); cp., for example, note 4 to
chapter 18.) But it plays its part in Marxist practice.
3
In Capital (387-9), Marx makes some interesting remarks both on Plato’s
theory of the division of labour (cp. note 29 to chapter 5 and text) and on the
caste character of Plato’s state. (Marx refers, however, only to Egypt and not to
Sparta; cp. note 27 to chapter 4.) In this connection, Marx quotes also an
interesting passage from Isocrates’ Busiris, 15 f., 224/5, where Isocrates first
proffers arguments for the division of labour very similar to those of Plato (text
to note 29 to chapter 5); Isocrates then continues: ‘The Egyptians ... were so
successful that the most celebrated philosophers who discuss such topics extol
the constitution of Egypt above all others, and that the Spartans ... govern their
own city in such an excellent manner because they have copied the ways of the
Egyptians.’ I think it most probable that Isocrates refers here to Plato; and he
may in turn be referred to by Crantor, when he spoke of those who accuse Plato
of becoming a disciple of the Egyptians, as mentioned in note 27 (3) to chapter
4.
4
Or, ‘intelligence destroying’; cp. text to note 68 to chapter 12. For
dialectics in general, and Hegelian dialectics in particular, cp. chapter 12,
especially text to notes 28-53. With Marx’s dialectics, I do not intend to deal in

this book, since I have dealt with it elsewhere. (Cp. What is Dialectic?, Mind,
N.S.. vol. 49, 1940, pp. 403 ff.; or, revised, in Conjectures and Refutations, pp.
312 ff.) I consider Marx’s dialectics, like Hegel’s, a rather dangerous muddle;
but its analysis can be avoided here, especially since the criticism of his
historicism covers all that may be taken seriously in his dialectics.
5
Cp., for instance, the quotation in the text to note 11 to this chapter.
6
Utopianism is first attacked by Marx and Engels in the Communist
Manifesto, III, 3. (Cp. H.o.M., 55 ff. = GA, Series I, vol. 6, 553-5.) For Marx’s
attacks upon the ‘bourgeois economists’ who ‘try to reconcile . . political
economy with the claims of the proletariat’, attacks directed especially against
Mill and other members of the Comtist school, cp. especially Capital, 868
(against Mill; see also note 14 to this chapter), and 870 (against the Comtist
Revue Positiviste; see also text to note 21 to chapter 18). For the whole problem
of social technology versus historicism, and of piecemeal social engineering
versus Utopian social engineering, cp. especially chapter 9, above. (See also the
notes 9 to chapter 3; 18 (3) to chapter 5; and I to chapter 9; with references to M.
Eastman’s Marxism: is it Science?’)
7
(1) The two quotations from Lenin are taken from Sidney and Beatrice
Webb, Soviet Communism (2nd ed., 1937), p. 650 f., who say, in a note, that the
second of the quotations is from a speech made by Lenin in May, 1918. It is
most interesting to see how quickly Lenin grasped the situation. On the eve of
his party’s rise to power, in August, 1917, when he published his book State and
Revolution, he was still a pure historicist. Not only was he as yet unaware of the
most difficult problems involved in the task of constructing a new society; he
even believed, with most Marxists, that the problems were non-existent, or that
they would be solved by the process of history. Cp. especially the passages from
State and Revolution in H.o.M., p. 757 f. (= Lenin, State and Revolution, L.L.L.,
vol. 14, 77-9). where Lenin emphasizes the simplicity of the problems of
organization and administration in the various phases of the evolving
Communist society. ‘All that is required’, he writes, ‘is that they should work
equally, should regularly do their share of work, and should receive equal pay.
The accounting and control necessary for this have been simplified’ (italics in
the original) ‘by capitalism to the utmost.” They can thus be simply taken over
by the workers, since these methods of control are ‘within reach of anybody who
can read and write, and knows the first four rules of arithmetic.’ These
astonishingly naive statements are representative. (We find similar views
expressed in Germany and in England; cp. this note, under (2).) They must be
contrasted with Lenin’s speeches made a few months later. They show how free
the prophetic ‘scientific socialist’ was from any foreboding of the problems and
disasters ahead. (I mean the disaster of the period of war-communism, that
period which was the outcome of this prophetic and anti-technological
Marxism.) But they show also Lenin’s capability of finding, and of admitting to
himself, the mistakes made. He abandoned Marxism in practice, although not in
theory. Compare also Lenin’s chapter V, sections 2 and 3, H.o.M., pp. 742 ff. ( =
State and Revolution, 67-73), for the purely historicist, i.e. prophetic and antitechnological (‘ anti-Utopian’, Lenin might have said; cp. p. 747 = State and
Revolution 70-71), character of this ‘scientific socialism’ before its rise to
power.
But when Lenin confessed that he knew no book dealing with the more
constructive problems of social engineering, then he only demonstrated that

Marxists, faithful to Marx’s commandments, did not even read the ‘Utopian
stuff’ of the ‘professorial armchair socialists’ who tried to make a beginning
with these very problems; I am thinking of some of the Fabians in England and
of A. Menger (e.g. Neue Staatslehre, 2nd ed. 1904, especially pp. 248 ff.) and J.
Popper-Lynkeus in Austria. The latter developed apart from many other
suggestions a technology of collective farming, and especially of giant farms of
the kind later introduced in Russia (see his Allgemeine Nährpflicht, 1912; cp. pp.
206 ff. and 300 ff. of the 2nd ed., 1923). But he was dismissed by Marxists as a’
half-socialist’. They called him a ‘half-socialist’ because he envisaged a private
enterprise sector in his society; he confined the economic activity of the state to
the care for the basic needs of everybody—for the ‘guaranteed minimum of
subsistence’. Everything beyond this was to be left to a strictly competitive
system.
(2) Lenin’s view in State and Revolution quoted above is (as J. Viner has
pointed out) very similar to that of John Carruthers, Socialism and Radicalism
(cp. note 9 to chapter 9); see especially pp. 14-16. He says: ‘The capitalists have
invented a system of finance which, although complex, is sufficiently simple to
be practically worked, and which fully instructs everyone as to the best manner
of managing his factory. A very similar although greatly simpler finance would
in the same way instruct the elected manager of a socialist factory how he
should manage it, and he would have no more need for advice from a
professional organizer than a capitalist has.”
8
This naive naturalistic slogan is Marx’s ‘principle of communism’ (taken
over by Marx from Louis Blanc’s article L’organisation de travail’, as Bryan
Magee has kindly pointed out to me). Its origin is Platonic and early Christian
(cp. note 29 to chapter 5; the Acts, 2, 44-45, and 4, 34-35; see also note 48 to
chapter 24, and the cross-references given there). It is quoted by Lenin in State
and Revolution; see H.o.M., 752 (= State and Revolution, 74.). Marx’s ‘principle
of socialism’, which is incorporated in the New Constitution of the U.S.S.R.
(1936), is slightly but significantly weaker; compare the Article 12: ‘In the
U.S.S.R.’, we read there, ‘the principle of socialism is realized: “From each
according to his ability, to each according to his work”.’ The substitution of
‘work’ for the early Christian term ‘needs’ transforms a romantic and
economically quite indefinite naturalistic phrase into a fairly practical but
commonplace principle—and into one which even ‘capitalism’ may claim as its
own.
9
I am alluding to the title of a famous book by Engels: ‘The Development
of Socialism From a Utopia Into a Science.” (The book has been published in
English under the title: Socialism: Utopian and Scientific.)
10
See my The Poverty of Historicism (Economica, 1944: now published
separately).
11
This is the eleventh of Marx’s Theses on Feuerbach (1845), cp. H.o.M.,
231 (= F. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach und der Ausgang der Klassischen
deutschen Philosophic, J. W. Dietz, Nachf. Berlin 1946, 56). See also notes 1416 to this chapter, and the sections I, 17 and 18 of The Poverty of Historicism.
12
I do not intend to discuss here the metaphysical or the methodological
problem of determinism in any detail. (A few further remarks on the problem
will be found in chapter 22, below.) But I wish to point out how little adequate it
is if ‘determinism’ and ‘scientific method’ are taken as synonyms. This is still
done, even by a writer of the excellence and clarity of B. Malinowski. Cp., for

instance, his paper in Human Affairs (ed. by Cattell, Cohen, and Travers, 1937),
chapter XII. I fully agree with the methodological tendencies of this paper, with
its plea for the application of scientific method in social science as well as with
its brilliant condemnation of romantic tendencies in anthropology (cp. especially
pp. 207 ff., 221-4.) But when Malinowski argues in favour of ‘determinism in
the study of human culture’ (p. 212; cp., for instance, also p. 252), I fail to see
what he means by ‘determinism’ if not simply ‘scientific method’. This equation
is, however, not tenable, and has its grave dangers, as shown in the text; for it
may lead to historicism.
13
For a criticism of historicism, see The Poverty of Historicism
(Economica, 1944). Marx may be excused for holding the mistaken belief that
there is a ‘natural law of historical development’; for some of the best scientists
of his time (e.g. T. H. Huxley; cp. his Lay Sermons, 1880, p. 214) believed in the
possibility of discovering a law of evolution. But there can be no empirical ‘law
of evolution’. There is a specific evolutionary hypothesis, stating that life on
earth has developed in certain ways. But a universal or natural law of evolution
would have to state a hypothesis concerning the course of development of life
on all planets (at least). In other words, wherever we are confined to the
observation of one unique process, there we cannot hope to find, and to test, a
‘law of nature’. (Of course, there are laws of evolution pertaining to the
development of young organisms, etc.).
There can be sociological laws, and even sociological laws pertaining to the
problem of progress; for example, the hypothesis that, wherever the freedom of
thought, and of the communication of thought, is effectively protected by legal
institutions and institutions ensuring the publicity of discussion, there will be
scientific progress. (Cp. chapter 23.) But there are reasons for holding the view
that we should do better not to speak of historical laws at all. (Cp. note 7 to
chapter 25, and text.)
14
Cp. Capital, 864 (Preface to the First Edition. For a similar remark of
Mill’s, see note 16, below.) At the same place, Marx also says: ‘It is the ultimate
aim of this work to lay bare the economic law of motion of modern society.’
(For this, cp. H.o.M., 374, and text to note 16 to the present chapter.) The clash
between Marx’s pragmatism and his historicism becomes fairly obvious if we
compare these passages with the eleventh of his Thesis on Feuerbach (quoted in
text to note 11 to this chapter). In The Poverty of Historicism, section 17, I have
tried to make this clash more obvious by characterizing Marx’s historicism in a
form which is exactly analogous to his attack on Feuerbach. For we can
paraphrase Marx’s passage quoted in the text by saying: The historicist can only
interpret social development, and aid it in various ways; his point, however, is
that nobody can change it. See also chapter 22, especially text to notes 5 ff.
15
Cp. Capital, 469; the next three quotations are from Capital, 868 (Preface
to the Second Edition. The translation ‘shallow syncretism’ is not quite in
keeping with the very strong expression of the original); op. cit., 673; and op.
cit., 830. For the ‘ample circumstantial evidence’ mentioned in the text, see, for
instance, op. cit., 105, 562, 649, 656.
16
Cp. Capital, 864 = H.o.M., 374; cp. note 14 to this chapter. The following
three quotations are from J. S. Mill, A System of Logic (1st ed., 1843; quoted
from the 8th ed.), Book VI, Chapter X; § 2 (end); § I (beginning); § I (end). An
interesting passage (which says nearly the same as Marx’s famous remark
quoted in text to note 14) can be found in the same chapter of Mill’s Logic, § 8.

Referring to the historical method, which searches for the ‘laws of social order
and of social progress’, Mill writes: ‘By its aid we may hereafter succeed not
only in looking far forward into the future history of the human race, but in
determining what artificial means may be used, and to what extent, to accelerate
the natural progress in so far as it is beneficial; to compensate for whatever may
be its inherent inconveniences or disadvantages, and to guard against the
dangers or accidents to which our species is exposed from the necessary
incidents of its progression.” (Italics mine.) Or as Marx puts it, to ‘shorten and
lessen its birth-pangs’.
17
Cp. Mill, loc. cit., § 2; the next remarks are from the first paragraph of §
3. The ‘orbit’ and the ‘trajectory’ are from the end of the second paragraph of §
3. When speaking of ‘orbits’ Mill thinks, probably, of such cyclical theories of
historical development as formulated in Plato’s Statesman, or perhaps in
Machiavelli’s Discourses on Livy.
18
Cp. Mill, loc. cit., the beginning of the last paragraph of § 3.__For all
these passages, cp. also notes 6-9 to chapter 14, and The Poverty of Historicism,
sections 22, 24, 27, 28.
19
Concerning psychologism (the term is due to E. Husserl), I may here
quote a few sentences by the excellent psychologist D. Katz; the passages are
taken from his article Psychological Needs (Chapter III of Human Affairs, ed. by
Cattell, Cohen, and Travers, 1937, p. 36). ‘In philosophy there has been for
some time a tendency to make psychology “the” fundamental basis of all other
sciences . . This tendency is usually called psychologism .. But even such
sciences, which, like sociology and economics, are more closely related to
psychology, have a neutral nucleus which is not psychological ..’ Psychologism
will be discussed at length in chapter 14. Cp. also note 44 to chapter 5.
20
Cp. Marx’s Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy (1859), quoted in H.o.M., 371 (= Karl Marx, Zur Kritik der politischen
Ökonomie, edited by K. Kautsky, J. W. Dietz, Nachf. Berlin 1930, LIV-LV, also
in Capital, p. xv f.). The passage is quoted more fully in text to note 13 to
chapter 15, and in text to note 3 to chapter 16; see also note 2 to chapter 14.

Notes To Chapter 14
1

Cp. note 19 to the last chapter.
Cp. Marx’s Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy, quoted also in note 20 to chapter 13 and in text to notes 13 to chapter
15 and 4 to chapter 16; cp. H.o.M., 372 = Capital, p. xvi. See also Marx and
Engels, German Ideology (H.o.M., 213 = GA, Series I, vol. v, 16): ‘It is not
consciousness that determines life, but life that determines consciousness.’
3
Cp. M. Ginsberg, Sociology (Home University Library, 130 ff.), who
discusses this problem in a similar context, without, however, referring to Marx.
4
Cp., for instance, Zoology Leaflet 10, published by the Field Museum of
Natural History, Chicago, 1929.
5
For institutionalism, cp. especially chapter 3 (text to notes 9 and 10) and
chapter 9.
6
Cp. Mill, A System of Logic, VI; IX, § 3. (Cp. also notes 16-18 to chapter
13.)
7
Cp. Mill, op. cit., VI; VI, § 2.
2

8

Cp. Mill, op. cit., VI; VII, § I. For the opposition between ‘methodological
individualism’ and ‘methodological collectivism’, see F. A. von Hayek’s
Scientism and the Study of Society, Part II, section VII (Economica, 1943, pp. 41
ff.).
9
For this and the following quotation see Mill, op. cit., VI; X, § 4.
10
I am using the term ‘sociological laws’ to denote the natural laws of
social life, as opposed to its normative laws; cp. text to notes 8-9 to chapter 5.
11
Cp. note 10 to chapter 3. (The passage is from p. 122 of part II of my The
Poverty of Historicism (Economica, N.S. xi, 1941.), and p. 65 of the book.
I owe the suggestion that it was Marx who first conceived social theory as
the study of the unwanted social repercussions of nearly all our actions to K.
Polanyi, who emphasized this aspect of Marxism in private discussions (1924).
* (1) It should be noted, however, that in spite of the aspect of Marxism
which has been just mentioned and which constitutes an important point of
agreement between Marx’s views on method and mine, there is a considerable
disagreement between Marx’s and my views about the way in which these
unwanted or unintended repercussions have to be analysed. For Marx is a
methodological collectivist. He believes that it is the ‘system of economic
relations’ as such which gives rise to the unwanted consequences—a system °f
institutions which, in turn, may be explicable in terms of ‘means of production’,
but which is not analysable in terms of individuals, their relations, and their
actions. As opposed to this, I hold that institutions (and traditions) must be
analysed in individualistic terms—that is to say, in terms of the relations of
individuals acting in certain situations, and of the unintended consequences of
their actions.
(2) The reference in the text to ‘canvas-cleaning’, and to chapter 9 is to
notes 9 to 12, and the text, of this chapter.
(3) Concerning the remarks in the text (in the paragraph to which this note
is appended, and in some of those which follow) about the unintended social
repercussions of our actions, I wish to draw attention to the fact that the situation
in the physical sciences (and in the field of mechanical engineering and
technology) is somewhat similar. The task of technology is here also largely to
inform us about unintended consequences of what we are doing (e.g. that a
bridge may become too heavy if we strengthen certain of its components). But
the analogy goes even further. Our mechanical inventions do rarely turn out
according to our original plans. The inventors of the motor car probably did not
foresee the social repercussions of their doings, but they certainly did not
foresee the purely mechanical repercussions—the many ways in which their cars
broke down. And while their cars were altered in order to avoid these
breakdowns, they changed beyond recognition. (And with them, some people’s
motives and aspirations changed also.)
(4) With my criticism of the Conspiracy Theory (pp. 94-6), cp. my
Prediction and Prophecy and their Significance for Social Theory (in
Proceedings of the Xth International Congress of Philosophy, 1948, vol. i, pp.
82 if., especially p. 87 f.), and Towards a Rational Theory of Tradition (The
Rationalist Annual, 1949, pp. 36 ff., especially p. 40 f.). Both papers are now in
my Conjectures and Refutations.*
12
See the passage from Mill cited in note 8 to this chapter.

13

Cp. note 63 to chapter 10. Important contributors to the logic of power are
Plato (in Books VIII and IX of the Republic, and in the Laws), Aristotle,
Machiavelli, Pareto, and many others.
14
Cp. Max Weber’s Ges. Aufsätze zur Wissenschaftslehre (1922), especially
pp. 408 ff.
A remark may be added here concerning the often repeated assertion that
the social sciences operate with a method different from that of the natural
sciences, in so far as we know the ‘social atoms’, i.e. ourselves, by direct
acquaintance, while our knowledge of physical atoms is only hypothetical. From
this, it is often concluded (e.g. by Karl Menger) that the method of social
science, since it makes use of our knowledge of ourselves, is psychological, or
perhaps ‘subjective’, as opposed to the ‘objective’ methods of the natural
sciences. To this, we may answer: There is surely no reason why we should not
use any ‘direct’ knowledge we may have of ourselves. But such knowledge is
useful in the social sciences only if we generalize, i.e. if we assume that what we
know of ourselves holds good for others too. But this generalization is of a
hypothetical character, and it must be tested and corrected by experience of an
‘objective’ kind. (Before having met anybody who does not like chocolate, some
people may easily believe that everybody likes it.) Undoubtedly, in the case of
‘social atoms’ we are in certain ways more favourably situated than in the case
of physical atoms, owing not only to our knowledge of ourselves, but also to the
use of language. Yet from the point of view of scientific method, a social
hypothesis suggested by self-intuition is in no different position from a physical
hypothesis about atoms. The latter may also be suggested to the physicist by a
kind of intuition about what atoms are like. And in both cases, this intuition is a
private affair of the man who proposes the hypothesis. What is ‘public’, and
important for science, is merely the question whether the hypotheses could be
tested by experience; and whether they stood up to tests. From this point of
view, social theories are no more ‘subjective’ than physical ones. (And it would
be clearer, for example, to speak of ‘the theory of subjective values’ or of ‘the
theory of acts of choice’ than of the ‘subjective theory of value’: see also note 9
to chapter 20.)
15
The present paragraph has been inserted in order to avoid the
misunderstanding mentioned in the text. I am indebted to Prof. E. Gombrich for
drawing my attention to the possibility of such a misunderstanding.
16
Hegel contended that his ‘Idea’ was something existing ‘absolutely’, i.e.
independently of anybody’s thought. One might contend, therefore, that he was
not a psychologist. Yet Marx, quite reasonably, did not take seriously this
‘absolute idealism’ of Hegel; he rather interpreted it as a disguised
psychologism, and combated it as such. Cp. Capital, 873 (italics mine): ‘For
Hegel, the thought process (which he even presents in disguise under the name
“Idea” as an independent agent or subject) is the creator of the real.’ Marx
confines his attack to the doctrine that the thought process (or consciousness, or
mind) creates the ‘real’; and he shows that it does not even create the social
reality (to say nothing about the material universe).
For the Hegelian theory of the dependence of the individual upon society,
see (apart from section iii of chapter 12) the discussion, in chapter 23, of the
social, or more precisely, the inter-personal element in scientific method, as well
as the corresponding discussion, in chapter 24, of the inter-personal element in
rationality.

Notes To Chapter 15
1

Cp. Cole’s Preface to Capital, xvi. (But see also the next note.)
Lenin too sometimes used the term ‘Vulgar Marxists’, but in a somewhat
different sense.—How little Vulgar Marxism has in common with the views of
Marx may be seen from Cole’s analysis, op. cit., xx, and from the text to notes 4
and 5 to chapter 16, and from note 17 to chapter 17.
3
According to Adler, lust for power, of course, is really nothing but the
urge towards compensation for one’s feelings of inferiority by proving one’s
superiority.
Some Vulgar Marxists even believe that the finishing touch to the
philosophy of the modern man was added by Einstein, who, so they think,
discovered ‘relativity’ or ‘relativism’, i.e. that ‘everything is relative’.
4
J. F. Hecker writes (Moscow Dialogues, p. 76) of Marx’s so-called
‘historical materialism’: ‘I would have preferred to call it “dialectical
historicism” or .. something of that sort.’—I again draw the reader’s attention to
the fact that in this book I am not dealing with Marx’s dialectics, since I have
dealt with them elsewhere. (Cp. note 4 to chapter 13.)
5
For Heraclitus’ slogan, cp. especially text to note 4 (3) to chapter 2, notes
16/17 to chapter 4, and note 25 to chapter 6.
6
Both the following quotations are from Capital, 873 (Epilogue to the
second ed. of vol. I).
7
Cp. Das Kapital, vol. III/2 (1894), p. 355; i.e. chapter 48, section III, from
where the following quotations are taken.
8
Cp. Das Kapital, vol. III/2, loc. cit.
9
For the quotations in this paragraph, cp. F. Engels, Anti-Dühring; see
H.o.M., 298, 299 (= F. Engels, Herrn Eugen Dühring’s Umwälzung der
Wissenschaft, GA special volume, 294-5).
10
I have in mind questions concerning, for example, the influence of
economic conditions (such as the need for land surveying) upon Egyptian
geometry, and upon the different development of early Pythagorean geometry in
Greece.
11
Cp. especially the quotation from Capital in note 13 to chapter 14; also
the full passages from the Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy, quoted only partially in the text to the next note. For the problem of
Marx’s essentialism, and the distinction between ‘reality’ and appearance, see
note 13 to this chapter, and notes 6 and 16 to chapter 17.
12
But I feel inclined to say that it is a little better than an idealism of the
Hegelian or Platonic brand; as I said in What is Dialectic?, if I were forced to
choose, which, fortunately, I am not, I would choose materialism. (Cp. p. 422 of
Mind, vol. 49, or Conjectures and Refutations, p. 331, where I deal with
problems very similar to those dealt with here.)
13
For this and the following quotations, cp. Marx’s Preface to A
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, H.o.M., 372 (= Zur Kritik der
politischen Ökonomie, LV).
Some further light is thrown upon these passages (and on the text to note 3
to chapter 16) by the Second Observation of part II of Marx’s Poverty of
Philosophy (cp. H.o.M., 354 f. = GA, Series I, vol. vi, 179-80); for Marx here
analyses society very clearly into three layers, if I may call them so. The first of
these layers corresponds to ‘reality’ or ‘essence’, the second and the third to a
2

primary and a secondary form of appearance. (This is very similar to Plato’s
distinction of Ideas, sensible things, and images of sensible things; cp. for the
problem of Plato’s essentialism chapter 3; for Marx’s corresponding ideas, see
also notes 8 and 16 to chapter 17). The first or fundamental layer (or ‘reality’) is
the material layer, the machinery and other material means of production that
exist in society; this layer is called by Marx the material ‘productive forces’, or
‘material productivity’. The second layer he calls ‘productive relationship’ or
‘social relations’; they are dependent on the first layer: ‘Social relations are
closely bound up with productive forces. In acquiring new productive forces
men change their mode of production; and in changing their mode of
production, they change their way of earning their living—they change all their
social relations.; (For the first two layers, cp. text to note 3 to chapter 16.) The
third layer is formed by the ideologies, i.e. by legal, moral, religious, scientific
ideas: ‘The same men who establish their social relations in conformity with
material productivity, produce also principles, ideas, and categories, in
conformity with their social relations.” In terms of this analysis, we may say that
in Russia the first layer was transformed in conformity with the third, a striking
refutation of Marx’s theory. (See also the next note.)
14
It is easy to make very general prophecies; for instance, to prophesy that,
within a reasonable time, it will rain. Thus there would not be much in the
prophecy that, in some decades, there will be a revolution somewhere. But, as
we see, Marx said just a little more than that, and just enough to be falsified by
events. Those who try to interpret this falsification away remove the last bit of
empirical significance from Marx’s system. It then becomes purely
‘metaphysical’ (in the sense of my The Logic of Scientific Discovery). How
Marx conceived the general mechanism of any revolution, in accordance with
his theory, is illustrated by the following description of the social revolution of
the bourgeoisie (also called the ‘industrial revolution’), taken from the
Communist Manifesto (H.o.M., 28; italics mine= GA, Series I, vol. vi, 530-31):
‘The means of production and of exchange, on whose foundation the
bourgeoisie built itself up, were generated in feudal society. At a certain stage in
the development of the means of production and of exchange .. the feudal
relations of property became no longer compatible with the already developed
productive forces. They became so many fetters. They had to be burst asunder.
And they were burst asunder.’ (Cp. also text to note 11, and note 17 to chapter
17.)
15
Cp. H. Heine, Religion and Philosophy in Germany, (Engl. transl., 1882)
here quoted from the appendix to P. Carus, Kant’s Prolegomena, 1912, p. 267.
16
A testimony to this friendship can be found in Capital, at the end of
footnote 2 to p. 671.
Marx, I admit, was often intolerant. Nevertheless, I feel—but I may easily
be mistaken—that he had sufficient critical sense to see the weakness of all
dogmatism, and that he would have disliked the way in which his theories were
converted into a set of dogmas. (See note 30 to chapter 17, and p. 425—p. 334
in Conjectures and Refutations—of What is Dialectic?. Cp. note 4 to chapter
13.) It seems, however, that Engels was prepared to tolerate the intolerance and
orthodoxy of the Marxists. In his Preface to the first English translation of
Capital, he writes (cp. Capital, 886) of the book that it ‘is often called, on the
Continent, “the Bible of the working class”.’ And instead of protesting against a
description which converts ‘scientific’ socialism into a religion, Engels proceeds

to show, in his comments, that Capital is worthy of this title, since ‘the
conclusions arrived at in this work are daily more and more becoming the
fundamental principles of the great working-class movement’ all over the world.
From here there was only one step to the heresy-hunting and excommunication
of those who retain the critical, i.e. scientific, spirit, the spirit which had once
inspired Engels as well as Marx.

Notes To Chapter 16
1

Cp. Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto; see H.o.M., p. 22 (= GA,
Series I, vol. vi, 525). As pointed out in chapter 4 (see text to notes 5/6 and
11/12), Plato had very similar ideas.
2
Cp. text to note 15 to chapter 14.
3
Cp. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, H.o.M., 355 (= GA, Series I, vol. vi,
179). (The quotation is from the same place as that from which the passages
quoted in note 13 to chapter 15 are taken.)
4
Cp. the preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy; cp.
Capital, xvi, and H.o.M., 371 f. (= Zur Kritik der politischen Ökonomie, LIVLV. See also note 20 to chapter 13, note 1 to chapter 14, note 13 to chapter 15,
and text.) The passage quoted here, and especially the terms ‘material
productive forces’ and ‘productive relationships’ receive some light from those
quoted in note 13 to chapter 15.
5
Cp. Capital, 650 f. See also the parallel passage on capitalist and miser in
Capital, 138 f., = H.o.M., 437; cp. also note 17 to chapter 17. In The Poverty of
Philosophy, H.o.M., 367 (= GA, Series I, vol. vi, 189), Marx writes: ‘Although
all the members of the modern bourgeoisie have the same interest in so far as
they form a class against another class, they have opposite, antagonistic
interests, in so far as they stand face to face with one another. This opposition of
interests results from the economic conditions of their bourgeois life.”
6
Capital, 651.
7
This is exactly analogous to Hegel’s nationalist historicism, where the true
interest of the nation gains consciousness in the subjective minds of the
nationals, and especially of the leader.
8
Cp. the text to note 14 to chapter 13.
9
Cp. Capital, 651.
10
* I originally used the term ‘laissez faire capitalism’; but in view of the
fact that ‘laissez faire’ indicates the absence of trade barriers (such as
customs)—something highly desirable, I believe—and of the fact that I consider
the economic policy of non-interference of the early nineteenth century as
undesirable, and even as paradoxical, I decided to change my terminology, and
to use the term ‘unrestrained capitalism’ instead.*

Notes To Chapter 17
1

Cp. the Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy
(H.o.M., 372 = Zur Kritik der politischen Ökonomie, LV). For the theory of the
strata or layers of the ‘superstructures’, see the quotations in note 13 to chapter
15.
2
For Plato’s recommendation of ‘both persuasion and force’, see, for
instance, text to note 35 to chapter 5, and notes 5 and 10 to chapter 8.

3

Cp. Lenin, State and Revolution (H.o.M., 733/4 and 735 = State and
Revolution, 15 and 16).
4
The two quotations are from Marx-Engels, The Communist Manifesto
(H.o.M., 46 = GA, Series I, vol. vi, 546).
5
Cp. Lenin, State and Revolution (H.o.M., 725 = State and Revolution, 89).
6
For the characteristic problems of a historicist essentialism, and especially
for problems of the type ‘What is the state?’ or ‘What is government?’ cp. the
text to notes 26-30 to chapter 3, 21-4 and 26 ff. to chapter 11 and 26 to chapter
12.
For the language of political demands (or better, of political ‘proposals’, as
L. J. Russell puts it) which in my opinion must replace this kind of essentialism,
cp. especially text between notes 41 and 42 to chapter 6 and note 5(3) to chapter
5. For Marx’s essentialism, see especially text to note 11, and note 13, to chapter
15; note 16 to the present chapter; and notes 20-24 to chapter 20. Cp. especially
the methodological remark in the third volume of Capital (Das Kapital, III/2, p.
352), quoted in note 20 to chapter 20.
7
This quotation is from the Communist Manifesto (H.o.M., 25 = GA, Series
I, vol. vi, 528). The text is from Engels’ Preface to the first English translation
of Capital. I quote here the whole concluding passage of this Preface; Engels
speaks there about Marx’s conclusion ‘that at least in Europe, England is the
only country where the inevitable social revolution might be effected entirely by
peaceful and legal means. Fie certainly never forgot to add that he hardly
expected the English ruling class lo submit, without a “pro-slavery rebellion”, to
this peaceful and legal revolution’. (Cp. Capital, 887; see also text to note 7 to
chapter 19.) This passage shows clearly that, according to Marxism, the violence
or non-violence of the revolution will depend on the resistance or non-resistance
of the old ruling class. Cp. also text to notes 3 ff. to chapter 19.
8
Cp. Engels, Anti-Dühring (H.o.M., 296 = GA, Special volume, 292); see
also the passages mentioned in note 5 to this chapter.
The resistance of the bourgeoisie has been broken for some years in Russia;
but there are no signs of the ‘withering away’ of the Russian state, not even in
its internal organization.
The theory of the withering away of the state is highly unrealistic, and I
think that it may have been adopted by Marx and Engels mainly in order to take
the wind out of their rivals’ sails. The rivals I have in mind are Bakunin and the
anarchists; Marx did not like to see anyone else’s radicalism outdoing his own.
Like Marx, they aimed at the overthrow of the existing social order, directing
their attack, however, against the politico-legal, instead of the economic system.
To them, the state was the fiend who had to be destroyed. But for his anarchist
competitors, Marx, from his own premises, might have easily granted the
possibility that the institution of the state, under socialism, might have to fulfil
new and indispensable functions; namely those functions of safeguarding justice
and freedom allotted to it by the great theorists of democracy.
9
Co. Capital, 799.
10
In the chapter, ‘Primary accumulation’, Marx is, as he says (p. 801), ‘not
concerned. with the purely economic causes of the agricultural revolution. Our
present interest is the forcible’ (i.e. political) ‘means that were used to bring
about the change.’
11
For the many passages, and the superstructures, cp. note 13 to chapter 15.

12

Cp. the text to the notes referred to in the last note.
One of the most noteworthy and valuable parts of Capital, a truly
imperishable document of human suffering, is Chapter VIII of the First Volume,
entitled The Working Day, in which Marx sketches the early history of labour
legislation. From this well-documented chapter, the following quotations are
taken.
It must, however, be realized that this very chapter contains the material for
a complete refutation of Marxist ‘Scientific Socialism’, which is based upon the
prophecy of ever-increasing exploitation of the workers. No man can read this
chapter of Marx without realizing that this prophecy has fortunately not come
true. It is not impossible, however, that this is due, in part, to the activities of the
Marxists in organizing labour; but the main contribution comes from the
increased productivity of labour—in its turn, according to Marx, a result of
‘Capitalist accumulation’.
14
Cp. Capital, 246. (See the footnote 1 to this passage.)
15
Cp. Capital, 257 f. Marx’s comment in his footnote 1 to this page is most
interesting. He shows that such cases as these were used by the pro-slavery Tory
reactionaries for propaganda for slavery. And he shows that among others,
Thomas Carlyle, the oracle (a forerunner of facism), participated in this proslavery movement. Carlyle, to quote Marx, reduced ‘the one great event of
contemporary history, the American Civil War, to this level, that the Peter of the
North wants to break the head of the Paul of the South because the Peter of the
North hires his workers “by the day, and the Paul of the South hires them by the
lifetime”.’ Marx is here quoting Carlyle’s article Ilias Americana in Nuce
(Macmillan’s Magazine, August, 1863). And Marx concludes: ‘Thus the bubble
of the Tory sympathy for the urban workers (the Tories never had any sympathy
for agricultural workers) has burst at last. Inside it we find—slavery!’
One of my reasons for quoting this passage is that I wish to emphasize
Marx’s complete disagreement with the belief that there is not much to choose
between slavery and ‘wage-slavery’. Nobody could stress more strongly than
Marx the fact that the abolition of slavery (and consequently the introduction of
‘wage-slavery’) is a most important and necessary step in the emancipation of
the oppressed. The term ‘wage-slavery’ is therefore dangerous and misleading;
for it has been interpreted, by Vulgar Marxists, as an indication that Marx
agreed with what is in fact Carlyle’s appraisal of the situation.
16
Marx defines the ‘value’ of a commodity as the average number of labour
hours necessary for its reproduction. This definition is a good illustration of his
essentialism (cp. note 8 to this chapter). For he introduces value in order to get
at the essential reality which corresponds to what appears in the form of the
price of a commodity. Price is a delusive kind of appearance. ‘A thing may have
a price without having value’, writes Marx (Capital, 79; see also Cole’s
excellent remarks in his Introduction to Capital, especially pp. xxvii, ff.). A
sketch of Marx’s ‘value theory’ will be found in chapter 20. (Cp. notes 9-27 to
that chapter, and text.)
17
For the problem of the ‘wage-slaves’, cp. end of note 15 to this chapter;
also Capital, 155 (especially footnote i). For Marx’s analysis the results of
which are briefly sketched here, see especially Capital, 153 ff., also the footnote
1 to p. 153; cp. also my chapter 20, below.
My presentation of Marx’s analysis may be supported by quoting a
statement made by Engels in his Anti-Dühring on the occasion of a summary of
13

Capital. Engels writes (H.o.M., 269 = GA, Special volume, 160-67): ‘In other
words, even if we exclude all possibility of robbery, violence, and fraud a even
if we assume that all private property was originally produced by the owner’s
own labour; and that throughout the whole subsequent process, there was only
exchange of equal values for equal values; even then the progressive
development of production and exchange would necessarily bring about the
present capitalist system of production; with its monopolization of the
instruments of production as well as of the goods of consumption in the hands of
a class weak in numbers; with its degradation into proletarian paupers of the
other class comprising the immense majority; with its periodic cycle of
production booms and of trade depressions; in other words, with the whole
anarchy of our present system of production. The whole process is explained by
purely economic causes: robbery, force, and the assumption of political
interference of any kind are unnecessary at any point whatever.” Perhaps this
passage may one day convince a Vulgar Marxist that Marxism does not explain
depressions by the conspiracy of ‘big business’. Marx himself said (Das Kapital,
II, 406 f., italics mine): ‘Capitalist production involves conditions which,
independently of good or bad intentions, permit only a temporary relative
prosperity of the working class, and always only as a forerunner of a
depression.’
18
For the doctrine ‘property is theft’ or ‘property is robbery’, cp. also
Marx’s remark on John Watts in Capital, 601, footnote i.
19
For the Hegelian character of the distinction between merely ‘formal’ and
‘actual’ or ‘real’ freedom, or democracy, cp. note 62 to chapter 12. Hegel like?
to attack the British constitution for its cult of merely ‘formal’ freedom, as
opposed to the Prussian State in which ‘real’ freedom is ‘actualized’. For the
quotation at the end of this paragraph, cp. the passage quoted in the text to note
7 to chapter 15. See also notes 14 and 15 to chapter 20, and text.
20
For the paradox of freedom and the need for the protection of freedom by
the state, cp. the four paragraphs in the text before note 42 to chapter 6, and
especially notes 4 and 6 to chapter 7, and text; see also note 41 to chapter 12,
and text, and note 7 to chapter 24.
21
Against this analysis, it may be said that, if we assume perfect
competition between the entrepreneurs as producers, and especially as buyers of
labour on the labour markets (and if we further assume that there is no
‘industrial reserve army’ of unemployed to exert pressure on this market), then
there could be no talk of exploitation of the economically weak by the
economically strong, i.e. of the workers by the entrepreneurs. But is the
assumption of perfect competition between the buyers on the labour markets at
all realistic? Is it not true that, for example, on many local labour markets, there
is only one buyer of any significance? Besides, we cannot assume that perfect
competition would automatically eliminate the problem of unemployment, if for
no other reason because labour cannot easily be moved.
22
For the problem of economic intervention by the state, and for a
characterization of our present economic system as interventionism, see the next
three chapters, especially note 9 to chapter 18 and text. It may be remarked that
interventionism as used here is the economic complement of what I have called
in chapter 6, text to notes 24-44, political protectionism. (It is clear why the term
‘protectionism’ cannot be used instead of ‘interventionism’.) See especially note
9 to chapter 18, and 25/26 to chapter 20, and text.

23

The passage is quoted more fully in the text to note 14 to chapter 13; for
the contradiction between practical action and historicist determinism, see that
note, and text to notes 5 ff. to chapter 22.
24
Cp. section II of chapter 7.
25
See Bertrand Russell, Power (1938); cp. especially pp. 123 ff.; Walter
Lippmann, The Good Society (1937), cp. especially pp. 188 ff.
26
Russell, Power, pp. 128 f. Italics mine.
27
Laws to safeguard democracy are still in a rather rudimentary state of
development. Very much could and should be done. The freedom of the press,
for instance, is demanded because of the aim that the public should be given
correct information; but viewed from this standpoint, it is a very insufficient
institutional guarantee that this aim will be achieved. What good newspapers
usually do at present on their own initiative, namely, giving the public all
important information available, might be established as their duty, either by
carefully framed laws, or by the establishment of a moral code sanctioned by
public opinion. Matters such as, for instance, the Zinovief letter, could be
perhaps controlled by a law which makes it possible to nullify elections won by
improper means, and which makes a publisher who neglects his duty to ascertain
as well as possible the truth of published information liable for the damage
done; in this case, for the expenses of a fresh election. I cannot go into details
here, but it is my firm conviction that we could easily overcome the
technological difficulties which may stand in the way of achieving such ends as
the conduct of election campaigns largely by appeal to reason instead of passion.
I do not see why we should not, for instance, standardize the size, type, etc., of
the electioneering pamphlets, and eliminate placards. (This need not endanger
freedom, just as reasonable limitations imposed upon those who plead before a
court of justice protect freedom rather than endanger it.) The present methods of
propaganda are an insult to the public as well as to the candidate. Propaganda of
the kind which may be good enough for selling soap should not be used in
matters of such consequence.
28
* Cp. the British ‘Control of Engagement Order’, 1947. The fact that this
order is hardly used (it is clearly not abused) shows that legislation of even the
most dangerous character is enacted without compelling need—obviously
because the fundamental difference between the two types of legislation, viz. the
one that establishes general rules of conduct, and the one that gives the
government discretionary powers, is not sufficiently understood.*
29
* For this distinction, and for the use of the term ‘legal framework’, see F.
A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom (I am quoting from the 1st English Edition,
London, 1944). See, for example, p. 54, where Hayek speaks of ‘the distinction
.. between the creation of a permanent framework of laws within which
productive activity is guided by individual decision, and the direction of
economic activity by a central authority.’ (Italics mine.) Hayek emphasizes the
significance of the predictability of the legal framework; see, for example, p.
56.*
30
The review, published in the European Messenger of St. Petersburg, is
quoted by Marx in the Preface to the 2nd edition of Capital. (See Capital, 871.)
In fairness to Marx, we must say that he did not always take his own system
too seriously, and that he was quite prepared to deviate a little from his
fundamental scheme; he considered it as a point of view (and as such it was
certainly most important) rather than as a system of dogmas.

Thus we read, on two consecutive pages of Capital (832 f.), a statement
which emphasizes the usual Marxist theory of the secondary character of the
legal system (or of its character as a cloak, an ‘appearance’), and another
statement which ascribes a very important role to the political might of the state
and raises it explicitly to the rank of a full-grown economic force. The first of
these statements, ‘The author would have done well to remember that
revolutions are not made by laws’, refers to the industrial revolution, and to an
author who asked for the enactments by which it was effected. The second
statement is a comment (and one most unorthodox from the Marxist Point of
view) upon the methods of accumulating capital; all these methods, Marx says,
‘make use of the power of the state, which is the centralized political might of
society. Might is the midwife of every old society pregnant with a new one. It is
itself an economic force.’ Up to the last sentence, which I have put in italics, the
passage is clearly orthodox. But the last sentence breaks through this orthodoxy.
Engels was more dogmatic. One should compare especially one of his
statements in his Anti-Dühring (H.o.M., 277), where he writes, ‘The role played
in history by political might as opposed to economic developments is now
clear.’ He contends that whenever ‘political might works against economic
developments, then, as a rule, with only few exceptions, it succumbs; these few
exceptions are isolated cases of conquest in which barbarian conquerors .. have
laid waste .. productive forces which they did not know how to use’. (Compare,
however, notes 13/14 to chapter 15, and text.)
The dogmatism and authoritarianism of most Marxists is a really
astonishing phenomenon. It just shows that they use Marxism irrationally, as a
metaphysical system. It is to be found among radicals and moderates alike. E.
Burns, for example, makes (in H.o.M., 374) the surprisingly naive statement that
‘refutations .. inevitably distort Marx’s theories’; which seems to imply that
Marx’s theories are irrefutable, i.e. unscientific; for every scientific theory is
refutable, and can be superseded. L. Laurat, on the other hand, in Marxism and
Democracy, p. 226, says: ‘In looking at the world in which we live, we are
staggered at the almost mathematical precision with which the essential
predictions of Karl Marx are being realized.”
Marx himself seems to have thought differently. I may be wrong in this, but
I do believe in the sincerity of his statement (at the end of his Preface to the first
edition of Capital; see 865): ‘I welcome scientific criticism, however harsh. But
in the face of the prejudices of a so-called public opinion, I shall stick to my
maxim ..: Follow your course, and let them chatter!’

Notes To Chapter 18
1

For Marx’s essentialism, and the fact that the material means of
production play the part of essences in his theory, cp. especially note 13 to
chapter 15. See also note 6 to chapter 17 and notes 20-24 to chapter 20, and text.
2
Cp. Capital, 864 = H.o.M., 374, and notes 14 and 16 to chapter 13.
3
What I call the secondary aim of Capital, its anti-apologetic aim, includes
a somewhat academic task, namely, the critique of political economy with
regard to its scientific status. It is this latter task to which Marx alluded both in
the title of the forerunner of Capital, namely in A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy, and in the sub-title of Capital itself, which reads, in literal
translation, Critique of Political Economy. For both these titles allude

unmistakably to Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason. And this title, in turn, was
intended to mean: ‘Critique of pure or metaphysical philosophy in regard to its
scientific status’. (This is more clearly indicated by the title of the paraphrase of
Kant’s Critique which reads in an almost literal translation: Prolegomena To
Any Metaphysics Which In Future May Justly Claim Scientific Status.) By
alluding to Kant, Marx apparently wished to say: ‘Just as Kant criticized the
claim of metaphysics, revealing that it was no science but largely apologetic
theology, so I criticize here the corresponding claims of bourgeois economics.”
That the main tendency of Kant’s Critique was, in Marx’s circles, considered to
be directed against apologetic theology can be seen from its representation in
Religion and Philosophy in Germany by Marx’s friend, H. Heine (cp. notes 15
and 16 to chapter 15). It is not quite without interest that, in spite of Engels’
supervision, the first English translators of Capital translated its sub-title as A
Critical Analysis of Capitalist Production, thus substituting an emphasis upon
what I have described in the text as Marx’s first aim for an allusion to his second
aim.
Burke is quoted by Marx in Capital, 843, note 1. The quotation is from E.
Burke, Thoughts and Details on Scarcity, 1800, p. 31 f.
4
Cp. my remarks on class consciousness towards the end of section I in
chapter 16.
Concerning the continued existence of class-unity after the class struggle
against the class enemy has ceased, it is, I think, hardly in keeping with Marx’s
assumptions, and especially with his dialectics, to assume that class
consciousness is a thing that can be accumulated and afterwards stored, that it
can survive the forces that produced it. But the further assumption that it must
necessarily outlive these forces contradicts Marx’s theory which looks upon
consciousness as a mirror or as a product of hard social realities. And yet, this
further assumption must be made by anybody who holds with Marx that the
dialectic of history must lead to socialism.
The following passage from the Communist Manifesto (H.o.M., 46 f. = GA,
Series I, vol. vi, 46) is particularly interesting in this context; it contains a clear
statement that the class consciousness of the workers is a mere consequence of
the ‘force of circumstances’, i.e. the pressure of the class situation; but it
contains, at the same time, the doctrine criticized in the text, namely, the
prophecy of the classless society. This is the passage: ‘In spite of the fact that
the proletariat is compelled, by the force of circumstances, to organize itself as a
class during its struggle with the bourgeoisie; in spite of the fact that, by means
of revolution, it makes itself the ruling class, and, as such, sweeps away by force
the old conditions of production; in spite of these facts, it will sweep away,
along with these conditions, also the conditions for the existence of any class
antagonism and of any classes, and will thereby abolish its own supremacy as a
class.—In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class
antagonism, we shall have an association in which the free development of each
is the warrant for the free development of all.’ (Cp. also text to note 8 to this
chapter.) It is a beautiful belief, but it is an aesthetic and romantic belief; it is a
wishful ‘Utopianism’, to use Marxist terminology, not a ‘scientific socialism’.
Marx fought against what he called ‘Utopianism’, and rightly so. (Cp.
chapter 9.) But since he was himself a romantic, he failed to discern the most
dangerous element in Utopianism, its romantic hysteria, its aestheticist
irrationalism; instead, he fought against its (admittedly most immature) attempts

at rational planning, opposing to them his historicism. (Cp. note 21 to the
present chapter.)
For all his acute reasoning and for all his attempts to use scientific method,
Marx permitted irrational and aesthetic sentiments to usurp, in places, complete
control of his thoughts. Nowadays one calls this wishful thinking. It was
romantic, irrational, and even mystical wishful thinking that led Marx to assume
that the collective class unity and class solidarity of the workers would last after
a change in the class situation. It is thus wishful thinking, a mystical
collectivism, and an irrational reaction to the strain of civilization which leads
Marx to prophesy the necessary advent of socialism.
This kind of romanticism is one of the elements of Marxism which appeals
most strongly to many of its followers. It is expressed, for example, most
touchingly in the dedication of Hecker’s Moscow Dialogues. Hecker speaks here
of socialism as of ‘a social order where the strife of class and race shall be no
more, and where truth, goodness and beauty shall be the share of all’. Who
would not like to have heaven on earth! And yet, it must be one of the first
principles of rational politics that we cannot make heaven on earth. We are not
going to become Free Spirits or angels at least not for the next couple: of
centuries or so. We are bound to this earth by our metabolism, as Marx once
wisely declared; or as Christianity puts it, we are spirits and flesh. Thus we must
be more modest. In politics and in medicine, he who promises too much is likely
to be a quack. We must try to improve things, but we must get rid of the idea of
a philosophers’ stone, of a formula which will convert our corrupt human
society into pure, lasting gold.
At the back of all this is the hope of casting out the devil from our world.
Plato thought he could do it by banishing him to the lower classes, and ruling
over him. The anarchists dreamt that once the state, the Political System, was
destroyed, everything must turn out well. And Marx dreamt a similar dream of
banishing the devil by destroying the economic system.
These remarks are not intended to imply that it is impossible to make even
rapid advances, perhaps even through the introduction of comparatively small
reforms, such as, for example, a reform of taxation, or a reduction of the rate of
interest. I only wish to insist that we must expect every elimination of an evil to
create, as its unwanted repercussion, a host of new though possibly very much
lesser evils, which may be on an altogether different plane of urgency. Thus the
second principle of sane politics would be: all politics consists in choosing the
lesser evil (as the Viennese poet and critic K. Kraus put it). And politicians
should be zealous in the search for the evils their actions must necessarily
produce instead of concealing them, since a proper evaluation of competing
evils must otherwise become impossible.
5
Although I do not intend to deal with Marx’s dialectics (cp. note 4 to
chapter 13), I may show that it would be possible to ‘strengthen’ Marx’s
logically inconclusive argument by so-called ‘dialectical reasoning’. In
accordance with this reasoning, all we need is to describe the antagonistic trends
within capitalism in such a manner that socialism (for instance in the form of a
totalitarian state-capitalism) appears as the necessary synthesis. The two
antagonistic tendencies of capitalism can then perhaps be described thus. Thesis:
The tendency towards the accumulation of capital in a few hands; towards
industrialization and bureaucratic control of industry; towards economic and
psychological levelling of the workers through the standardization of needs and

desires. Antithesis: The increasing misery of the great masses; their increasing
class consciousness in consequence of (a) class war, and (b) their increasing
realization of their paramount significance within an economic system like that
of an industrial society in which the working class is the only productive class,
and accordingly the only essential class. (Cp. also note 15 to chapter 19, and
text.)
It is hardly necessary to show how the desired Marxist synthesis emerges;
but it may be necessary to insist that a slightly changed emphasis in the
description of the antagonistic tendency may lead to very different’ syntheses’;
in fact, to any other synthesis one wishes to defend. For instance, one could
easily present fascism as a necessary synthesis; or perhaps ‘technocracy’; or
else, a system of democratic interventionism.
6
* Bryan Magee writes about this passage: ‘This is what The New Class by
Djilas is all about: a fully worked out theory of the realities of the Communist
revolution, written by an unrepentant Communist.’ *
7
The history of the working-class movement is full of contrasts. It shows
that the workers have been ready for the greatest sacrifices in their fight for the
liberation of their own class, and beyond this, of mankind. But there are also
many chapters telling a sorry tale of quite ordinary selfishness and of the pursuit
of sectional interest to the detriment of all.
It is certainly understandable that a trade union which obtains a great
advantage for its members through solidarity and collective bargaining should
try to exclude those from these benefits who are not prepared to join the union;
for instance, by incorporating in their collective contracts the condition that only
members of the union are to be employed. But it is a very different matter, and
indeed indefensible, if a union which in this way has obtained a monopoly
closes its membership list, thus keeping out fellow workers who want to join,
without even establishing a just method (such as the strict adherence to a waiting
list) of admitting new members. That such things can occur shows that the fact
that a man is a worker does not always prevent him from forgetting all about the
solidarity of the oppressed and from making full use of the economic
prerogatives he may possess, i.e. from exploiting his fellow workers.
8
Cp. The Communist Manifesto (H.o.M., 47 = GA, Series I, vol. vi, 546);
the passage is quoted more fully in note 4 to this chapter, where Marx’s
romanticism is dealt with.
9
The term ‘capitalism’ is much too vague to be used as a name of a definite
historical period. The term ‘capitalism’ was originally used in a disparaging
sense, and it has retained this sense (‘ system favouring big profits made by
people who do not work’) in popular usage. But at the same time it has also been
used in a neutral scientific sense, but with many different meanings. In so far as,
according to Marx, all accumulations of means of production may be termed
‘capital’, we may even say that ‘capitalism’ is in a certain sense synonymous
with ‘industrialism’. We could in this sense quite correctly describe a
communist society, in which the state owns all capital, as ‘state-capitalism’. For
these reasons, I suggest using the name ‘unrestrained capitalism’ for that period
which Marx analysed and christened ‘capitalism’, and the name interventionism
for our own period. The name ‘interventionism’ could indeed cover the three
main types of social engineering in our time: the collectivist interventionism of
Russia; the democratic interventionism of Sweden and the ‘Smaller
Democracies’ and the New Deal in America; and even the fascist methods of

regimented economy. What Marx called ‘capitalism’—i.e. unrestrained
capitalism—has completely ‘withered away’ in the twentieth century.
10
The Swedish ‘social democrats’, the party which inaugurated the Swedish
experiment, had once been Marxist; but it gave up its Marxist theories shortly
after its decision to accept governmental responsibilities and to embark upon a
great programme of social reform. One of the aspects in which the Swedish
experiment deviates from Marxism is its emphasis upon the consumer, and the
role played by the consumer co-operatives, as opposed to the dogmatic Marxist
emphasis upon production. The technological economic theory of the Swedes is
strongly influenced by what Marxists would call’ bourgeois economics’, while
the orthodox Marxist theory of value plays no role in it whatever.
11
For this programme, see H.o.M., 46 (= GA, Series I, vol. vi, 545).—With
point (1), cp. text to note 15 to chapter 19.
It may be remarked that even in one of the most radical statements ever
made by Marx, the Address to the Communist League (1850), he considered a
progressive income tax a most revolutionary measure. In the final description of
revolutionary tactics towards the end of this address which culminates in the
battle cry ‘Revolution in permanence!’ Marx says: ‘If the democrats propose
proportional taxation, the workers must demand progressive taxation. And
should the democrats themselves declare for a moderate progressive tax, the
workers must insist upon a steeply graduated tax; so steeply graduated as to
cause the collapse of large capital.’ (Cp. H.o.M., 70, and especially note 44 to
chapter 20.)
12
For my conception of piecemeal social engineering, cp. especially chapter
9. For political intervention in economic matters, and a more precise explanation
of the term interventionism, see note 9 to this chapter and text.
13
I consider this criticism of Marxism very important. It is mentioned in
sections 17/18 of my The Poverty of Historicism; and as stated there, it can be
parried by proffering a historicist moral theory. But I believe that only if such a
theory (cp. chapter 22, especially notes 5 ff. and text) is accepted can Marxism
escape the charge that it teaches ‘the belief in political miracles’. (This term is
due to Julius Kraft.) See also notes 4 and 21 to the present chapter.
14
For the problem of compromise, cp. a remark at the end of the paragraph
to which note 3 to chapter 9 is appended. For a justification of the remark in the
text, ‘For they do not plan for the whole of society’, see chapter 9, and my The
Poverty of Historicism, II (especially the criticism of holism).
15
F. A. von Hayek (cp., for example, his Freedom and the Economic
System, Chicago, 1939) insists that a centralized ‘planned economy’ must
involve the gravest dangers to individual freedom. But he also emphasizes that
planning for freedom is necessary. (‘Planning for freedom’ is also advocated by
Mannheim, in his Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction, 1941. But since
his idea of ‘planning’ is emphatically collectivistic and holistic, I am convinced
that it must lead to tyranny, and not to freedom; and, indeed, Mannheim’s
‘freedom’ is the offspring of Hegel’s. Cp. the end of chapter 23, and my paper
quoted at the end of the preceding note.)
16
This contradiction between the Marxist historical theory and the Russian
historical reality is discussed in chapter 15, notes 13/14, and text.
17
This is another contradiction between Marxist theory and historical
practice; as opposed to that mentioned in the last note, this second contradiction
has given rise to many discussions and attempts to explain the matter by the

introduction of auxiliary hypotheses. The most important of these is the theory
of imperialism and colonial exploitation. This theory asserts that the
revolutionary development is frustrated in countries in which the proletarian in
common with the capitalist reaps where not he but the oppressed natives of the
colonies have sown. This hypothesis which is undoubtedly refuted by
developments like those in the non-imperialistic Smaller Democracies will be
discussed more fully in chapter 20 (text to notes 37-40).
Many social democrats interpreted the Russian revolution, in accordance
with Marx’s scheme, as a belated ‘bourgeois revolution’, insisting that this
revolution was bound up with an economic development parallel to the
‘industrial revolution’ in the more advanced countries. But this interpretation
assumes, of course, that history must conform with the Marxist scheme. In fact,
such an essentialist problem as whether the Russian revolution is a belated
industrial revolution or a premature ‘social revolution’ is of a purely verbal
character; and if it leads to difficulties within Marxism, then this shows only that
Marxism has verbal difficulties in describing events which have not been
foreseen by its founders.
18
The leaders were able to inspire in their followers an enthusiastic faith in
their mission—to liberate mankind. But the leaders also were responsible for the
ultimate failure of their politics, and the breakdown of the movement. This
failure was due, very largely, to intellectual irresponsibility. The leaders had
assured the workers that Marxism was a science, and that the intellectual side of
the movement was in the best hands. But they never adopted a scientific, i.e. a
critical, attitude towards Marxism. As long as they could apply it (and what is
easier than this?), as long as they could interpret history in articles and speeches,
they were intellectually satisfied. (Cp. also notes 19 and 22 to this chapter.)
19
For a number of years prior to the rise of fascism in Central Europe a very
marked defeatism within the ranks of the social democratic leaders was
noticeable. They began to believe that fascism was an unavoidable stage in
social development. That is to say, they began to make some amendments to
Marx’s scheme, but they never doubted the soundness of the historicist
approach; they never saw that such a question as ‘Is fascism an unavoidable
stage in the development of civilization?’ may be totally misleading.
20
The Marxist movement in Central Europe had few precedents in history It
was a movement which, in spite of the fact that it professed atheism, can truly be
called a great religious movement. (Perhaps this may impress some of those
intellectuals who do not take Marxism seriously.) Of course it was a collectivist
and even a tribalist movement, in many ways. But it was a movement of the
workers to educate themselves for their great task to emancipate themselves, to
raise the standard of their interests and of their pastimes; to substitute
mountaineering for alcohol, classical music for swing, serious books for
thrillers. ‘The emancipation of the working class can only be achieved by the
workers themselves’ was their belief. (For the deep impression made by this
movement on some observers, see, for example, G. E. R. Gedye’s Fallen
Bastions, 1939.)
21
The quotation is from Marx’s Preface to the second edition of Capital,
(cp. Capital, 870; cp. also note 6 to chapter 13.) It shows how fortunate Marx
was in his reviewers (cp. also note 30 to chapter 17, and text).
Another most interesting passage in which Marx expresses his antiUtopianism and historicism can be found in The Civil War in France (H.o.M.,

150, K. Marx, Der Bürgerkrieg in Frankreich, A. Willaschek, Hamburg 1920,
65-66), where Marx says approvingly of the Paris Commune of 1871: ‘The
working class did not expect miracles from the Commune. They have no readymade Utopias, to be introduced by the decree of the people. They know that in
order to achieve their own emancipation, and with it, those higher forms to
which our present society is irresistibly tending, .. they will have to pass through
long struggles, through a series of historic processes, transforming
circumstances and men. They have no ideals to realize, but to set free the
elements of the new society with which the old collapsing bourgeois society
itself is pregnant.’ There are few passages in Marx which exhibit the historicist
lack of plan more strikingly. ‘They have to pass through long struggles ..’, Marx
says. But if they have no plan to realize, ‘no ideals to realize’, as Marx says,
what are they struggling for? They ‘did not expect miracles’, Marx says; but he
himself expected miracles in believing that the historical struggle irresistibly
tends to ‘higher forms’ of social life. (Cp. notes 4 and 13 to the present chapter.)
Marx was to a certain extent justified in his refusal to embark upon social
engineering. To organize the workers was undoubtedly the most important
practical task of his day. If such a suspect excuse as ‘the time was not ripe for it’
can ever be justly applied, it must be applied to Marx’s refusal to dabble in the
problems of rational institutional social engineering. (This point is illustrated by
the childish character of the Utopian proposals down to and including, say,
Bellamy). But it was unfortunate that he supported this sound political intuition
by a theoretical attack upon social technology. This became an excuse for his
dogmatic followers to continue in the same attitude at a time when things had
changed, and technology had become politically more important even than
organizing the workers.
22
The Marxist leaders interpreted the events as the dialectical ups and
downs of history. They thus functioned as cicerones, as guides through the hills
(and valleys) of history rather than as political leaders of action. This dubious art
of interpreting the terrible events of history instead of fighting them was
forcefully denounced by the poet K. Kraus (mentioned in note 4 to this chapter).

Notes To Chapter 19
1

Cp. Capital, 846 = H.o.M., 403.
The passage is from Marx-Engels, The Communist Manifesto. (Cp.
H.o.M., 31 = GA, Series I, vol. vi, 533.)
3
Cp. Capital, 547 = H.o.M., 560 (where it is quoted by Lenin).
A remark may be made concerning the term ‘concentration of capital’
(which I have translated in the text’ concentration of capital in a few hands’). In
the third edition of Capital (cp. Capital, 689 ff.) Marx introduced the following
distinctions: (a) by accumulation of capital he means merely the growth in the
total amount of capital goods, for example, within a certain region; (b) by
concentration of capital he means (cp. 689/690) the normal growth of the capital
in the hands of the various individual capitalists, a growth which arises from the
general tendency towards accumulation and which gives them command over an
increasing number of workers, (c) by centralization he means (cp. 691) that kind
of growth of capital which is due to the expropriation of some capitalists by
other capitalists (‘ one capitalist lays many of his fellows low’).
2

In the second edition, Marx had not yet distinguished between concentration
and centralization; he used the term ‘concentration’ in both senses (A) and (c).
To show the difference, we read in the third edition (Capital, 691): ‘Here we
have genuine centralization, in contradistinction to accumulation and
concentration.” In the second edition, we read at this place: ‘Here we have
genuine concentration, in contradistinction to accumulation.’ The alteration,
however, was not made throughout the book, but only in a few passages
(especially pp. 690-3, and 846). In the passage here quoted in the text, the
wording remained the same as in the second edition. In the passage (p. 846)
quoted in the text to note 15 to this chapter, Marx replaced ‘concentration’ by
‘centralization’.
4
Cp. Marx’s Eighteenth Brumaire (H.o.M., 123; italics mine = Karl Marx,
Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, Verlag für Literatur und Politik.
Wien-Berlin 1927, 28-29): ‘The bourgeois republic triumphed. On its side stood
the aristocracy of finance, the industrial bourgeoisie, the middle class, the petty
bourgeoisie, the army, the rabble proletariat, organized as the Mobile Guard,
the intellectual lights, the clergy, and the rural population. On the side of the
Paris proletariat stood none but the proletariat itself.’
For an incredibly naive statement made by Marx concerning the ‘rural
producers’, cp. also note 43 to chapter 20.
5
Cp. text to note 11 to chapter 18.
6
Cp. the quotation in note 4 to the present chapter, especially the reference
to the middle class and to the ‘intellectual lights’.
For the ‘rabble proletariat’, cp. the same place and Capital, 711 f. (The term
is there translated as ‘tatterdemalion proletariat’.)
7
For the meaning of ‘class consciousness’ in Marx’s sense, see end of
section I in chapter 16.
Apart from the possible development of a defeatist spirit, as mentioned in
the text, there are other things which may undermine the class consciousness of
the workers, and which may lead to disunion among the working class. Lenin,
for example, mentions that imperialism may split the workers by offering them a
share in its spoils; he writes (H.o.M., 707 = V. I. Lenin, L.L.L., Imperialism, the
Highest State of Capitalism, vol. xv, 96; cp. also note 40 to chapter 20): ‘.. in
Great Britain, the tendency of imperialism to split the workers, to strengthen the
opportunists among them, and to cause temporary decay in the working-class
movement, revealed itself much earlier than at the end of the nineteenth and the
beginning of the twentieth centuries.”
H. B. Parkes rightly mentions in his excellent analysis, Marxism—A Post
Mortem (1940; also published under the title Marxism—An Autopsy), that it is
quite possible that entrepreneurs and workers may together exploit the
consumer; in a protected or monopolist industry, they may share in the spoil.
This possibility shows that Marx exaggerates the antagonism between the
interests of the workers and entrepreneurs.
And lastly it may be mentioned that the tendency of most governments to
proceed along the line of least resistance is liable to lead to the following result.
Since workers and entrepreneurs arc the best organized and politically most
powerful groups in the community, a modern government may easily tend to
satisfy both at the expense of the consumer. And it may do so without a guilty
conscience; for it will persuade itself that it has done well by establishing peace
between the most antagonistic parties in the community.

8

Cp. text to notes 17 and 18 to this chapter.
Some Marxists even dare to assert that there would be far less suffering
involved in a violent social revolution than in the chronic evils inherent in what
they call ‘capitalism’. (Cp. L. Laurat, Marxism and Democracy, translated by E.
Fitzgerald, 1940; p. 38, note 2; Laurat criticizes Sidney Hook, Towards an
Understanding of Marx, for holding such views.) These Marxists do not,
however, disclose the scientific basis of this estimate; or to speak more bluntly,
of this utterly irresponsible piece of oracular pretence.
10
‘It should be plain without any further comment’, Engels says about
Marx, remembering his Hegel, ‘that if things and their mutual relations are taken
to be variable instead of fixed, then their mental images, their notions, will be
subject to variation and transformation also; that one does not attempt to force
them into the pigeonholes of rigid definitions; but that one treats them, as the
case may be, according to the historical or logical character of the process by
which they have been formed.” (Cp. Engels’ Preface to Das Kapital, III/1, p.
xvi.)
11
It does not correspond precisely because the Communists sometimes
profess the more moderate theory, especially in those countries where this
theory is not represented by the Social Democrats. Cp., for example, text to note
26 to this chapter.
12
Cp. notes 4 and 5 to chapter 17, and text; as well as note 14 to the present
chapter; and contrast with notes 17 and 18 to the present chapter, and text.
13
There are, of course, positions between these two; and there are also more
moderate Marxist positions: especially A. Bernstein’s so-called ‘revisionism’.
This latter position, in fact, gives up Marxism altogether; it is nothing but the
advocacy of a strictly democratic and non-violent workers’ movement.
14
This development of Marx’s is, of course, an interpretation, and not a
very convincing one; the fact is that Marx was not very consistent, and that he
used the terms ‘revolution’, ‘force’, ‘violence’, etc., with a systematic
ambiguity. This position was partly forced upon him by the fact that history
during his lifetime did not proceed according to his plan. It conformed to the
Marxist theory in so far as it exhibited most clearly a tendency away from what
Marx called ‘capitalism’, i.e. away from non-intervention. Marx frequently
referred with satisfaction to this tendency, for example, in his Preface to the first
edition of Capital. (Cp. the quotation in note 16 to the present chapter; see also
the text.) On the other hand, this same tendency (towards interventionism) led to
an improvement of the lot of the workers in opposition to Marx’s theory; and it
thereby reduced the likelihood of a revolution. Marx’s wavering and ambiguous
interpretations of his own teaching are probably the result of this situation.
In order to illustrate the point, two passages may be quoted, one from an
early and one from a late work of Marx. The early passage is from the Address
to the Communist League (1850; cp. H.o.M., pp. 60 ff. = Labour Monthly,
September 1922, 136 ff.). The passage is interesting because it is practical. Marx
assumes that the workers together with the bourgeois democrats have won the
battle against feudalism and have set up a democratic regime. Marx insists that
after having achieved this, the battle-cry of the workers must be ‘Revolution in
permanence!’ What this means is explained in detail (p. 66): ‘They must act in
such a manner that the revolutionary excitement does riot collapse immediately
after the victory. On the contrary, they must maintain it as long as possible. Far
from opposing so-called excesses, such as the sacrificing to popular revenge of
9

hated individuals or public buildings to which hateful memories are attached,
such deeds must not only be tolerated, but their direction must be taken in hand,
for example’s sake.’ (Cp. also note 35 (1) to this chapter, and note 44 to chapter
20.)
A moderate passage which contrasts with the previous one may be chosen
from Marx’s Address to the First International (Amsterdam, 1872; cp. L.
Laurat, op. cit., p. 36): ‘We do not deny that there are countries, such as the
United States and Great Britain—if I knew your institutions better, I should
perhaps add Holland—where the workers will be able to achieve their aims by
peaceful means. But this is not the case in all countries.’ For these more
moderate views, cp. also text to notes 16-18 to the present chapter.
But the whole confusion can be found in a nutshell as early as in the final
summary of the Manifesto where we find the following two contradictory
statements, separated by one sentence only: (1) ‘In short, the Communists
support everywhere every revolutionary movement against the existing social
and political order of things.’ (This must include England, for example.) (2)
Finally, they labour everywhere for the union and agreement of the democratic
parties of all countries.’ To make the confusion complete, the next sentences
run: ‘The communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly
declare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all
existing social conditions.’ (Democratic conditions are not excluded.)
15
Cp. Capital, 846 = H.o.M., 403 f. (Concerning the term ‘centralization’,
substituted in the third edition for the term ‘concentration’ of the second edition,
cp. note 3 to the present chapter. Concerning the translation ‘their capitalist
cloak becomes a straight jacket’, it may be remarked that a more literal
translation would be: ‘they become incompatible with their capitalist wrapper’
or ‘cloak’; or slightly more freely: ‘their capitalist cloak becomes intolerable’.)
This passage is strongly influenced by Hegelian dialectics, as is shown by
its continuation. (Hegel called the antithesis of a thesis sometimes its negation,
and the synthesis the ‘negation of the negation’.) ‘The capitalist method of
appropriation’, Marx writes, ‘.. is the first negation of individual private
property based upon individual labour. But with the inexorability of a law of
nature, capitalist production begets its own negation. It is the negation of the
negation. This second negation .. establishes .. the common ownership of the
land and of the means of production.’ (For a more detailed dialectical derivation
of socialism, cp. note 5 to chapter 18.)
16
This was the attitude taken up by Marx in his Preface to the first edition
of Capital (Capital, 865), where he says: ‘Still, progress is undeniable ... The
foreign representatives of the British crown .. tell us .. that in the more advanced
countries of the European continent, a change in the relations between capital
and labour is just as obvious and as inevitable as in England ... Mr. Wade, the
vice-president of the United States of North America .. declares at public
meetings that, after the abolition of slavery, a radical change in the conditions of
capital and landed property comes next on the agenda!’ (Cp. also note 14 to this
chapter.)
17
Cp. Engels’ Preface to the first English edition of Capital. (Capital, 887.)
The passage is quoted more fully in note 9 to chapter 17.
18
Cp. Marx’s letter to Hyndman, dated December 8th, 1880; see H. H.
Hyndman, The Record of an Adventurous Life (1911), p. 283. Cp. also L. Laurat,
op. cit., 239. The passage may be quoted here more fully: ‘If you say that you do

not share the views of my party for England I can only reply that that party
considers an English revolution not necessary, but—according to historic
precedents—possible. If the unavoidable evolution turns into a revolution, it
would not only be the fault of the ruling classes, but also of the working class.’
(Note the ambiguity of the position.)
19
H. B. Parkes, Marxism—A Post Mortem, p. 101 (cp. also pp. 106 ff.),
expresses a similar view; he insists that the Marxist ‘belief that capitalism
cannot be reformed but can only be destroyed’ is one of the characteristic tenets
of the Marxist theory of accumulation. ‘Adopt some other theory’, he says, ‘. .
and it remains possible for capitalism to be transformed by gradual methods.’
20
Cp. the end of the Manifesto (H.o.M., 59 = GA, Series I, vol. vi, 557):
‘The proletarians have nothing to lose but their fetters. They have a world to
win.’
21
Cp. the Manifesto (H.o.M., 45 = GA, Series I, vol. vi, 545); the passage is
quoted more fully in text to note 35 to this chapter.—The last quotation in this
paragraph is from the Manifesto, H.o.M., 35 (= GA, Series I, vol. vi, 536). Cp.
also note 35 to this chapter.
22
But social reforms have rarely been carried out under the pressure of
those who suffer; religious movements—I include the Utilitarians—and
individuals (like Dickens) may influence public opinion greatly. And Henry
Ford discovered, to the astonishment of all Marxists and many ‘capitalists’ that a
rise in wages may benefit the employer.
23
Cp. notes 18 and 21 to chapter 18.
24
Cp. H.o.M., 37 (= GA, Series I, vol. vi, 538).
25
Cp. The State and Revolution, H.o.M., 756 (= State and Revolution, 77).
Here is the passage in full: ‘Democracy is of great importance for the working
class in its struggle for freedom against the capitalists. But democracy is by no
means a limit one may not overstep; it is only one of the stages in the course of
the development from feudalism to capitalism, and from capitalism, to
Communism.’
Lenin insists that democracy means only ‘formal equality’. Cp. also H.o.M.,
834 (= V. I. Lenin, The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kaulsky.
L.L.L., vol. xviii, 34), where Lenin uses this Hegelian argument of merely
‘formal’ equality against Kautsky:’.. he accepts the formal equality, which under
capitalism is merely a fraud and a piece of hypocrisy at its face value as a de
facto equality ..’
26
Cp. Parkes, Marxism—A Post Mortem, p. 219.
27
Such a tactical move is in keeping with the Manifesto which announces
that the Communists ‘labour everywhere for the union and agreement of the
democratic parties of all countries’, but which announces at the same time ‘that
their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of existing social
conditions’, which include democratic conditions.
But such a tactical move is also in keeping with the party programme of
1928; for this says (H.o.M., 1036; italics mine = The Programme of the
Communist International, Modern Books Ltd., London 1932, 61): ‘In
determining its line of tactics each Communist Party must take into account the
concrete internal and external situation ... The party determines slogans .. with a
view to organizing .. the masses on the broadest possible scale.’ But this cannot
be achieved without making full use of the systematic ambiguity of the term
revolution.

28

Cp. H.o.M., 59 and 1042 (= GA, Series I, vol. vi, 557, and Programme of
the Communist International, 65); and end of note 14 to this chapter. (See also
note 37.)
29
This is not a quotation but a paraphrase. Cp., for example, the passage
from Engels’ Preface to the first English edition of Capital quoted in note 9 to
chapter 17. See also L. Laurat, op. cit., p. 240.
30
The first of the two passages is quoted by L. Laurat, loc. cit.; for the
second, cp. H.o.M., 93 (= Karl Marx, The Class Struggle in France 1848-1850.
Introduction by F. Engels. Co-operative Publishing Society of Foreign Workers
in the U.S.S.R., Moscow 1934, 29). Italics mine.
31
Engels was partly conscious that he had been forced to a change of front
since ‘History has proved us wrong, and all who thought like us’, as he said
(H.o.M., 79 = Karl Marx, Die Klassenkampfe in Frankreich, Vorwärts, Berlin
1890, 8). But he was conscious mainly of one mistake: that he and Marx had
overrated the speed of the development. That the development was, in fact, in a
different direction, he never admitted, although he complained of it; cp. text to
notes 38-9 to chapter 20, where I quote Engels’ paradoxical complaint that the
‘working class is actually becoming more and more bourgeois’.
32
Cp. notes 4 and 6 to chapter 7.
33
They may continue for other reasons also; for example, because the
tyrant’s power depends on the support of a certain section of the ruled. But this
does not mean that the tyranny must in fact be a class rule, as the Marxists
would say. For even if the tyrant is forced to bribe a certain section of the
population, to grant them economic or other advantages, this does not mean that
he is forced by this section, or that this section has the power to claim and to
enforce these advantages as their right. If there are no institutions in existence
enabling that section to enforce its influence, the tyrant may withdraw the
benefits enjoyed by this section and seek support from another one.
34
Cp. H.o.M., 171 (= Karl Marx, Civil War in France, Introduction by F.
Engels. Martin Lawrence, London 1933, 19). (See also H.o.M., 833 = The
Proletarian Revolution, 33-34.)
35
Cp. H.o.M., 45 (= GA, Series I, vol. vi, 545). See also note 21 to this
chapter. Cp. further the following passage from the Manifesto (H.o.M., 37 = GA,
Series I, vol. vi, 538): ‘The immediate aim of the Communists is the .. conquest
of political power by the proletariat.’
(1) Tactical advice that must lead to the loss of the battle of democracy is
given in detail by Marx in his Address to the Communist League. (H.o.M., 67 =
Labour Monthly, September 1922, 143; cp. also note 14 to this chapter and note
44 to chapter 20.) Marx explains there the attitude to be taken up, after
democracy has been attained, towards the democratic party with whom,
according to the Manifesto (cp. note 14 to this chapter), the communists have
had to establish ‘union and agreement’. Marx says: ‘In short, from the first
moment of victory, we must no longer direct our distrust against the beaten
reactionary enemy, but against our former allies’ (i.e. the democrats). Marx
demands that ‘the arming of the whole proletariat with rifles, guns, and
ammunition should be carried out at once’ and that ‘the workers must try to
organize themselves into an independent guard, with their own chiefs and
general staff’. The aim is ‘that the bourgeois democratic Government not only
immediately loses all backing among the workers, but from the commencement

finds itself under the supervision and threats of authorities behind whom stands
the entire mass of the working class’.
It is clear that this policy is bound to wreck democracy. It is bound to make
the Government turn against those workers who are not prepared to abide by the
law, but try to rule by threats. Marx tries to excuse his politics by prophecy
(H.o.M., 68 and 67 = Labour Monthly, Sept. 1922, 143): ‘As soon as the new
Government is established they will commence to fight the workers’, and he
says: ‘In order that this party’ (i.e. the democrats) ‘whose betrayal of the
workers will begin with the first hour of victory, should be frustrated in its
nefarious work, it is necessary to organize and to arm the proletariat.’ I think
that his tactics would produce precisely the nefarious effect he prophesies. They
would make his historical prophecy come true. Indeed, if the workers were to
proceed in this way, every democrat in his senses would be forced (even if, and
particularly if, he wished to promote the cause of the oppressed) to join in what
Marx describes as the betrayal of the workers, and to fight against those who
were out to wreck the democratic institutions for the protection of the individual
from the benevolence of tyrants and Great Dictators.
I may add that the passages quoted are comparatively early utterance, of
Marx and that his more mature opinions were probably somewhat different and
at any rate more ambiguous. But this does not detract from the fact that these
early passages had a lasting influence, and that they have often been acted upon,
to the detriment of all concerned.
(2) In connection with point (b) in the text above, a passage from Lenin may
be quoted (H.o.M., 828 = The Proletarian Revolution, 30):’.. the working class
realizes perfectly well that the bourgeois parliaments are institutions foreign to
them, that they are instruments of the oppression of the proletariat by the
bourgeoisie, that they are institutions of the hostile class, of the exploiting
minority.’ It is clear that these stories did not encourage the workers to defend
parliamentary democracy against the assault of the fascists.
36
Cp. Lenin, State and Revolution (H.o.M., 744 = State and Revolution,
68): ‘Democracy .. for the rich, that is the democracy of capitalist society ...
Marx brilliantly grasped the essence of capitalist democracy when .. he said that
the oppressed were allowed, once every few years, to decide which particular
representatives of the oppressing class should .. oppress them!’ See also notes 1
and 2 to chapter 17.
37
Lenin writes in Left-Wing Communism (H.o.M., 884 f.; italics mine = V.
I. Lenin, Left-Wing Communism, An Infantile Disorder. L.L.L. vol. xvi, 7273):’.. all attention must be concentrated on the next step .. on seeking out the
forms of transition or approach to the proletarian revolution. The proletarian
vanguard has been ideologically won over ... But from this first step it is still a
long way to victory .. . In order that the entire class .. may take up such a
position, propaganda and agitation alone are not enough. The masses must have
their own political experience. Such is the fundamental law of all great
revolutions . .: it has been necessary .. to realize through their own painful
experience .. the absolute inevitability of a dictatorship of the extreme
reactionaries .. as the only alternative to a dictatorship of the proletariat, in
order to turn them resolutely towards communism.’
38
As is to be expected, each of the two Marxist parties tries to put the blame
for their failure on the other; the one blames the other for its policy of
catastrophe, and in its turn is blamed by the latter for keeping up the worker’s

faith in the possibility of winning the battle of democracy. It is somewhat
ironical to find that Marx himself has given an excellent description which fits
every detail of this method of blaming the circumstances, and especially the
competing party, for one’s failure. (The description was, of course, aimed by
Marx against a competing leftist group of his time.) Marx writes (H.o.M., 130;
last group of italics mine = V. I. Lenin, The Teachings of Karl Marx, L.L.L. vol.
i, 55): ‘They do not need to consider their own resources too critically. They
have merely to give the signal, and the people, with all its inexhaustible
resources, will fall upon the oppressors. If, in the actual event, their . . powers
prove to be sheer impotence, then the fault lies either with the pernicious
sophists’ (the other party, presumably) ‘who split the united people into different
hostile camps, or .. the whole thing has been wrecked by a detail in its
execution, or else an unforeseen accident has, for the time being, spoilt the
game. In any case the democrat’ (or the anti-democrat) ‘comes out of the most
disgraceful defeat immaculate, just as he went into it innocent, with the newly
won conviction that he is destined to conquer; that neither he himself nor his
party have to give up their old standpoint, but, on the contrary, conditions have
to ripen, to move in his direction ..’
39
I say ‘the radical wing’, for this historicist interpretation of fascism as
being an inevitable stage in the inexorable development was believed in, and
defended, by groups far beyond the ranks of the Communists. Even some of the
leaders of the Viennese workers who offered a heroic but belated and badly
organized resistance to fascism believed faithfully that fascism was a necessary
step in the historical development towards socialism. Much as they hated it, they
felt compelled to regard even fascism as a step forward, bringing the suffering
people nearer to the ultimate goal.
40
Cp. the passage quoted in note 37 to this chapter.

Notes To Chapter 20
1

The only complete English translation of the three volumes of Capital has
nearly 2, 500 pages. To these have to be added the three volumes which were
published in German under the title Theories of Surplus Value; they contain
material, largely historical, which Marx intended to use in Capital.
2
Cp. the opposition between an unrestrained capitalism and interventionism
introduced in chapters 16 and 17. (See notes 10 to chapter 16, 22 to chapter 17
and 9 to chapter 18, and text.)
For Lenin’s statement, cp. H.o.M., 561 (= The Teachings of Karl Marx, 29,
italics mine). It is interesting that neither Lenin nor most of the Marxists appear
to realize that society has changed since Marx. Lenin speaks in 1914 of
‘contemporary society’ as if it were Marx’s as well as his contemporary society.
But the Manifesto was published in 1848.
3
For all quotations in this paragraph, cp. Capital, 691.
4
Cp. the remarks on these terms made in note 3 to chapter 19.
5
It would do better because the defeatist spirit, which might endanger class
consciousness (as mentioned in the text to note 7 to chapter 19), would be less
likely to develop.
6
Cp. Capital, 697 ff.
7
The two quotations are from Capital, 698 and 706. The term translated by
‘semi-prosperity’ would be, in a more literal translation, ‘medium prosperity’. I

translate ‘excessive production’ instead of ‘over-production’ because Marx does
not mean ‘over-production’ in the sense that more is produced than can be sold
now, but in the sense that so much is produced that a difficulty of selling it will
soon develop.
8
As Parkes puts it; cp. note 19 to chapter 19.
9
The labour theory of value is, of course, very old. My discussion of the
value theory, it must be remembered, is confined to the so-called ‘objective
value theory’; I do not intend to criticize the ‘subjective value theory’ (which
should perhaps better be described as the theory of subjective evaluation, or of
acts of choice; cp. note 14 to chapter 14). J. Viner kindly pointed out to me that
almost the only connection between Marx’s value theory and Ricardo’s arises
out of Marx’s misunderstanding of Ricardo, and that Ricardo never held that,
unit for unit, labour had any more creating power than capital.
10
It appears to me certain that Marx never doubted that his ‘values’ in some
way correspond to market prices. The value of a commodity, he taught, is equal
to that of another one if the average number of labour hours needed for their
production is the same. If one of the two commodities is old, then its weight can
be considered as the price of the other commodity expressed in gold; and since
money is based (by law) upon gold, we thus arrive at the money price of a
commodity.
The actual exchange ratios on the market, Marx teaches (see especially the
important footnote 1 to p. 153 of Capital), will oscillate about the value ratios;
and accordingly, the market price in money will also oscillate about the
corresponding value ratio to gold of the commodity in question. ‘If the
magnitude of value is transformed into price’, Marx says, a bit clumsily
(Capital, 79; italics mine), ‘then this .. relation assumes the form of an exchange
ratio to that commodity which functions as money’ (i.e. gold). ‘In this ratio
expresses itself, however, not only the magnitude of the value of the commodity,
but also the ups and downs, the more or less, for which special circumstances
are responsible’; in other words, prices may fluctuate. ‘The possibility .. of a
derivation of price from .. value is therefore inherent in the price form. This is
not a defect; on the contrary, it shows that the price form is quite adequate to a
method of production in which regularities can manifest themselves only as
averages of irregularities.’ It seems to me clear that the ‘regularities’ of which
Marx speaks here are the values, and that he believes that values ‘manifest
themselves’ (or ‘assert themselves’) only as averages of the actual market prices,
which are therefore oscillating about the value.
The reason why I emphasize this is that it has sometimes been denied. G. D.
H. Cole, for example, writes in his ‘Introduction’ (Capital, xxv; italics mine):
‘Marx .. speaks usually as if commodities had actually a tendency, subsequent to
temporary market fluctuations, to exchange at their “values”. But he says
explicitly (on page 79) that he does not mean this; and in the third volume of
Capital he .. makes the inevitable divergence of prices and “values” abundantly
clear.” But although it is true that Marx does not consider the fluctuations as
merely ‘temporary’, he does hold that commodities have a tendency, subject to
market fluctuations, to exchange at their ‘values’; for as we have seen in the
passage quoted here, and referred to by Cole, Marx does not speak of any
divergence between value and price, but describes fluctuations and averages.
The position is somewhat different in the third volume of Capital, where (in
Chapter IX) the place of the ‘value’ of a commodity is taken by a new category,

the ‘production-price’, which is the sum of its production cost plus the average
rate of surplus value. But even here it remains characteristic of Marx’s thinking
that this new category, the production-price, is related to the actual market price
as a kind of regulator of averages only. It does not determine the market price
directly, but it expresses itself (just as does ‘value’ in the first volume) as an
average about which the actual prices oscillate or fluctuate. This may be shown
with the help of the following passage (Das Kapital, III/2, p. 396 f.): ‘The
market prices rise above or fall below these regulating production-prices, but
these oscillations compensate one another ... The same principle of regulative
averages rules here that has been established by Quetelet for social phenomena
in general.’ Similarly, Marx speaks there (p. 399) of the ‘regulative price .. , i.e.
the price about which market prices oscillate’; and on the next page, where he
speaks of the influence of competition, he says that he is interested in the
‘natural price .. , i.e. the price .. that is not regulated by competition, but
regulates it.” (Italics mine.) Apart from the fact that the ‘natural’ price clearly
indicates that Marx hopes to find the essence of which the oscillating market
prices are the ‘forms of appearance’ (cp. also note 23 to this chapter), we see
that Marx consistently clings to the view that this essence, whether value or
production-price, manifests itself as the average of the market prices. See also
Das Kapital, III/1, 171 f.
11
Cole, op. cit., xxix, says in his otherwise excellently clear statement of
Marx’s theory of Surplus Value that it was ‘his distinctive contribution to
economic doctrine’. But Engels, in his Preface to the second volume of Capital,
has shown that this theory was not Marx’s, that Marx not only never claimed
that it was, but also had dealt with its history (in his Theories of Surplus Value;
cp. note 1 to this chapter). Engels quotes from Marx’s manuscript in order to
show that Marx deals with Adam Smith’s and Ricardo’s contribution to that
theory and quotes at length from the pamphlet, The Source and Remedy of the
National Difficulties, mentioned in Capital, 646, in order to show that the main
ideas of the doctrine, apart from the Marxian distinction between labour and
labour power, can be found there. (Cp. Das Kapital, II, xii-xv.)
12
The first part is called by Marx (cp. Capital, 213 f.) necessary labour
time, the second part surplus labour time.
13
Cp. Engels’ Preface to the second volume of Capital. (Das Kapital, II,
xxi, f.)
14
Marx’s derivation of the doctrine of surplus value is of course closely
connected with his criticism of ‘formal’ freedom, ‘formal’ justice, etc. Cp.
especially notes 17 and 19 to chapter 17, and text. See also the text to the next
note.
15
Cp. Capital, 845. See also the passages referred to in the foregoing note.
16
Cp. the text to note 18 (and note 10) to this chapter.
17
See especially chapter X of the third volume of Capital.
18
For this quotation, cp. Capital, 706. From the words ‘thus surplus
population’, the passage follows immediately after the one quoted in the text to
note 7 to this chapter. (I have omitted the word ‘relative’ before ‘surplus
population’, since it is irrelevant in the present context, and perhaps confusing.
There seems to be a misprint in the Everyman edition: ‘overproduction’ instead
of ‘surplus population’.) The quotation is of interest in connection with the
problem of supply and demand, and with Marx’s teaching that these must have a
‘background’ (or ‘essence’); cp. notes 10 and 20 to this chapter.

19

It may be mentioned in this connection that the phenomena in question—
misery in a period of rapidly expanding industrialization (or of ‘early
capitalism’; cp. note 36 below, and text) has recently been explained by a
hypothesis which, if it can be upheld, would show that there was a great deal in
Marx’s theory of exploitation. I have in mind a theory based on Walter Euken’s
doctrine of the two pure monetary systems (the gold and the credit system), and
his method of analysing the various historically given economic systems as
‘mixtures’ of pure systems. Applying this method, Leonhard Miksch has
recently pointed out (in a paper Die Geldordnung der Zukunft, Zeitschrift fur das
Gesamte Kreditwesen, 1949) that the credit system leads to forced investments,
i.e. the consumer is forced to save, to abstain; ‘but the capital saved by way of
these forced investments’, Miksch writes, ‘does not belong to those who were
forced to abstain from consumption, but to the entrepreneurs’.
If this theory proves acceptable, then Marx’s analysis (but neither his ‘laws’
nor his prophecies) would be vindicated to a considerable extent. For there is
only a small difference between Marx’s ‘surplus value’ which, by rights,
belongs to the worker but is ‘appropriated’ or ‘expropriated’ by the ‘capitalist’,
and Miksch’s ‘forced savings’ which become the property, not of the consumer
who was forced to save, but of the ‘entrepreneur’. Miksch himself hints that
these results explain much of the economic development of the nineteenth
century (and of the rise of socialism).
It should be noted that Miksch’s analysis explains the relevant facts in terms
of imperfections in the competitive system (he speaks of an ‘economic
monopoly of money creation which is possessed of stupendous power’) while
Marx attempted to explain corresponding facts with the help of the assumption
of a free market, i.e. of competition. (Furthermore, ‘consumers’ and ‘industrial
workers’ cannot, of course, be completely identified.) But whatever the
explanation, the facts—described by Miksch as ‘intolerably anti-social ‘—
remain; and it is to Marx’s credit, both that he did not accept these facts, and that
he tried hard to explain them.
20
Cp. note 10 to this chapter, especially the passage on the ‘natural’ price
(also note 18 and text); it is interesting that in the third volume of Capital, not
far from the passages quoted in note 10 to this chapter (see Das Kapital, III/2,
352; italics mine), and in a similar context, Marx makes the following
methodological remark: ‘All science would be superfluous if the forms of
appearance of things coincided with their essences.’ This is, of course, pure
essentialism. That this essentialism borders on metaphysics is shown in note 24
to this chapter.
It is clear that when Marx speaks repeatedly, especially in the first volume,
of the price-form, he has a ‘form of appearance’ in mind; the essence is ‘value’.
(Cp. also note 6 to chapter 17 and text.)
21
In Capital, pp. 43 ff.: ‘The Mystery of the Fetishistic Character of
Commodities.’
22
Cp. Capital, 567 (see also 328), with Marx’s summary: ‘If the
productivity of labour is doubled then, if the ratio of necessary labour to surplus
labour remains unaltered, .. the only result will be that each of them will
represent twice as many use-values’ (i.e. commodities) ‘as before. These usevalues are now twice as cheap as before ... Thus it is possible, when the
productivity of labour is increasing, that the price of labour power should keep

on falling, and yet that this fall should be accompanied by a constant growth in
the quantity of the worker’s means of subsistence.’
23
If productivity increases more or less generally, then the productivity of
the gold companies may also increase; and this would mean that gold, like every
other commodity, becomes cheaper if appraised in labour hours. Accordingly,
the same would hold for gold as for other commodities; and when Marx says
(cp. the foregoing note) that the quantity of the worker’s real income increases,
this would, in theory, also be true of his income in gold, i.e. in money. (Marx’s
analysis in Capital, p. 567, of which I have quoted only a summary in the
foregoing note, is therefore not correct wherever he speaks of ‘prices’; for
‘prices’ are ‘values’ expressed in gold, and these may remain constant if
productivity increases equally in all lines of production, including the
production of gold.)
24
The strange thing about Marx’s value theory (as distinct from the English
classical school, according to J. Viner) is that it considers human labour as
fundamentally different from all other processes in nature, for example, from the
labour of animals. This shows clearly that the theory is based ultimately upon a
moral theory, the doctrine that human suffering and a human lifetime spent is a
thing fundamentally different from all natural processes. We can call this the
doctrine of the holiness of human labour. Now I do not deny that this theory is
right in the moral sense; that is to say, that we should act according to it. But I
also think that an economic analysis should not be based upon a moral or
metaphysical or religious doctrine of which the holder is unconscious. Marx
who, as we shall see in chapter 22, did not consciously believe in a humanitarian
morality, or who repressed such beliefs, was building upon a moralistic basis
where he did not suspect it—in his abstract theory of value. This is, of course,
connected with his essentialism: the essence of all social and economic relations
is human labour.
25
For interventionism, cp. notes 22 to chapter 17 and 9 to chapter 18. (See
also note 2 to the present chapter.)
26
For the paradox of freedom in its application to economic freedom, cp.
note 20 to chapter 17, where further references are given.
The problem of the free market, mentioned in the text only in its application
to the labour market, is of very considerable importance. Generalizing from
what has been said in the text, it is clear that the idea of a free market is
paradoxical. If the state does not interfere, then other semi-political
organizations such as monopolies, trusts, unions, etc., may interfere, reducing
the freedom of the market to a fiction. On the other hand, it is most important to
realize that without a carefully protected free market, the whole economic
system must cease to serve its only rational purpose, that is, to satisfy the
demands of the consumer. If the consumer cannot choose; if he must take what
the producer offers; if the producer, whether a private producer or the state or a
marketing department, is master of the market, instead of the consumer; then the
situation must arise that the consumer serves, ultimately, as a kind of moneysupply and rubbish-remover for the producer, instead of the producer serving the
needs and desires of the consumer.
Here we are clearly faced with an important problem of social engineering:
the market must be controlled, but in such a way that the control does not
impede the free choice of the consumer and that it does not remove the need for
the producers to compete for the favour of the consumer. Economic ‘planning’

that does not plan for economic freedom in this sense will lead dangerously
close to totalitarianism. (Cp. F. A. von Hayek’s Freedom and the Economic
System, Public Policy Pamphlets, 1939/40.)
27
Cp. note 2 to this chapter, and text.
28
This distinction between machinery serving mainly for the extension and
machinery serving mainly for the intensification of production is introduced in
the text largely with the aim of making the presentation of the argument more
lucid. Apart from that, it is also, I hope, an improvement of the argument.
I may give here a list of the more important passages of Marx, bearing on
the trade cycle (t-c), and on its connection with unemployment (u): Manifesto,
29 f. (t-c).—Capital, 120 (monetary crisis = general depression), 624 (t-c and
currency), 694 (u), 698 (t-c), 699 (t-c depending on u; automatism of the cycle),
703-705 (t-c and u in interdependence), 706 f. (u). See also the third volume of
Capital, especially chapter XV, section on Surplus of Capital and Surplus of
Population, H.o.M., 516-528 (t-c and u) and chapters XXV-XXXII (t-c and
currency; cp. especially Das Kapital, III/2, 22 ff.) See also the passage from the
second volume of Capital from which a sentence is quoted in note 17 to chapter
17.
29
Cp. the Minutes of Evidence, taken before the Secret Committee of the
House of Lords appointed to inquire into the causes of Distress, etc., 1875,
quoted in Das Kapital, III/1, pp. 398 ff.
30
Cp. for example the two articles on Budgetary Reform by C. G. F. Simkin
in the Australian Economic Record, 1941 and 1942 (see also note 3 to chapter
9). These articles deal with counter cycle policy, and report briefly on the
Swedish measures.
31
Cp. Parkes, Marxism—A Post Mortem, especially p. 220, note 6.
32
The quotations are from Das Kapital, III/2, 354 f. (I translate ‘useful
commodities’ although ‘use-value’ would be more literal.)
33
The theory I have in mind (held, or very nearly held, by J. Mill as J. Viner
informs me) is frequently alluded to by Marx, who struggled against it without,
however, succeeding in making his point quite clear. It can be expressed briefly
as the doctrine that all capital reduces ultimately to wages, since the
‘immobilized’ (or as Marx says, ‘constant’) capital has been produced, and paid
for, in wages. Or in Marx’s terminology: There is no constant but only variable
capital.
This doctrine has been very clearly and simply presented by Parkes (op. cit.,
97): ‘All capital is variable capital. This will be plain if we consider a
hypothetical industry which controls the whole of its processes of production
from the farm or the mine to the finished product, without buying any machinery
or raw material from outside. The entire cost of production in such an industry
will consist of its wage bill.’ And since an economic system as a whole can be
considered as such a hypothetical industry’, within which machinery (constant
capital) is always paid for in terms of wages (variable capital), the sum total of
constant capital must form part of the sum total of variable capital.
I do not think that this argument, in which I once believed myself, can
invalidate the Marxian position. (This is perhaps the only major point in which I
cannot agree with Parkes’s excellent criticism.) The reason is this. If the
hypothetical industry decides to increase its machinery—not only to replace it,
or to make necessary improvements—then we can look upon this process as a
typical Marxian process of accumulation of capital by the investment of profits.

In order to measure the success of this investment, we should have to consider
whether the profits in succeeding years had increased in proportion to it. Some
of these new profits may be invested again. Now during the year in which they
were invested (or profits were accumulated by conversion into constant capital),
they were paid for in the form of variable capital. But once they have been
invested, they are, in the following periods, considered as part of the constant
capital, since they are expected to contribute proportionally to new profits. If
they do not, the rate of profit must fall, and we say that it was a mal-investment.
The rate of profit is thus a measure of the success of an investment, of the
productivity of the newly added constant capital, which, though originally
always paid for in the form of variable capital, none the less becomes constant
capital in the Marxian sense, and exerts its influence upon the rate of profit.
34
Cp. chapter XIII of the third volume of Capital, for example, H.o.M.,
499: ‘We see then, that in spite of the progressive fall in the rate of profit, there
may be . . an absolute increase in the mass of the produced profit. And this
increase may be progressive. And it may not only be so. On the basis of
capitalist production, it must be so, aside from temporary fluctuations.’
35
The quotations in this paragraph are from Capital, 708 ff.
36
For Parkes’s summary, cp. Marxism—A Post Mortem, p. 102.
It may be mentioned here that the Marxian theory that revolutions depend
on misery has been to some extent confirmed in the last century by the outbreak
of revolutions in countries in which misery actually increased. But contrary to
Marx’s prediction, these countries were not those of developed capitalism. They
were either peasant countries or countries where capitalism was at a primitive
stage of development. Parkes has given a list to substantiate this statement. (Cp.
op. cit., 48.) It appears that revolutionary tendencies decrease with the advance
of industrialization. Accordingly, the Russian revolution should not be
interpreted as premature (nor the advanced countries as over-ripe for
revolution), but rather as a product of the typical misery of capitalist infancy and
of peasant misery, enhanced by the misery of war and the opportunities of
defeat. See also note 19, above.
37
Cp. H.o.M., 507.
In a footnote to this passage (i.e. Das Kapital, III/1, 219), Marx contends
that Adam Smith is right, against Ricardo.
The passage from Smith to which Marx probably alludes is quoted further
below in the paragraph: it is from the Wealth of Nations (vol. II, p. 95 of the
Everyman edition).
Marx quotes a passage from Ricardo (Works, ed. MacCulloch, p. 73 =
Ricardo, Everyman edition, p. 78). But there is an even more characteristic
Passage in which Ricardo holds that the mechanism described by Smith cannot ..
affect the rate of profit’ (Principles, 232).
38
For Engels, cp. H.o.M., 708 (= Quoted in Imperialism, 96).
39
For this change of front, cp. note 31 to chapter 19, and text.
40
Cp. Lenin, Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917); H.o.M.,
708 (= Imperialism, 97).
41
This may be an excuse, though only a very unsatisfactory excuse, for
certain most depressing remarks of Marx, quoted by Parkes, Marxism—A Post
Mortem (213 f, note 3).—They are most depressing since they raise the question
whether Marx and Engels were the genuine lovers of freedom one would like

them to be; whether they were not more influenced by Hegel’s irresponsibility
and by his nationalism than one should, from their general teaching, expect.
42
Cp. H.o.M., 295 (= GA, Special Volume, 290-1): ‘By more and more
transforming the great majority of the population into proletarians, the capitalist
mode of production creates the force which .. is compelled to carry out this
revolution.’ For the passage from the Manifesto, cp. H.o.M., 35 (= GA, Series I,
vol. vi, 536).—For the following passage, cp. H.o.M., 156 f. (= Der Bürgerkrieg
in Frankreich, 84).
43
For this amazingly naive passage, cp. H.o.M., 147 f. (= Der Bürgerkrieg
in Frankreich, 75 f.).
44
For this policy, cp. Marx’s Address to the Communist League, quoted in
notes 14 and 35-37 to chapter 19. (Cp. also, for example, notes 26 f. to that
chapter.) See further the following passage from the Address (H.o.M., 70 f.;
italics mine = Labour Monthly, Sept. 1922, 145-6): ‘Thus, for instance, if the
petty bourgeoisie purpose to purchase the railways and factories, the workers
must demand that such railways and factories shall simply be confiscated by the
State without compensation; for they are the property of the reactionaries. If the
democrats propose proportional taxation, the workers must demand progressive
taxation. If the democrats themselves declare for a moderate progressive tax, the
workers must insist on a steeply graduated tax; so steeply graduated as to cause
the collapse of large capital. If the democrats propose the regulation of the
National Debt, the workers must demand State bankruptcy. The demands of the
workers will depend on the proposals and measures of the democrats.’ These
are the tactics of the Communists, of whom Marx says: ‘Their battle-cry must
be: “Revolution in permanence!”’

Notes To Chapter 21
1

Cp. notes 22 to chapter 17 and 9 to chapter 18, and text.
Engels says in the Anti-Dühring that Fourier long ago discovered the
‘vicious circle’ of the capitalist mode of production; cp. H.o.M., 287.
3
Cp. H.o.M., 527 (= Das Kapital, III/1, 242).
4
Cp., for example, Parkes, Marxism—A Post Mortem, pp. 102 ff.
5
This is a question which I wish to leave open.
6
This point has been emphasized by my colleague, Prof. C. G. F. Simkin, in
discussions.
7
Cp. text to note 1 to chapter 14, and end of note 17 to chapter 17.
8
Cp. H. A. L. Fisher, History of Europe (1935), Preface, vol. I, p. vii. The
passage is quoted more fully in note 27 to chapter 25.
2

Notes To Chapter 22
1

For Kierkegaard’s fight against ‘official Christianity’, cp. especially his
Book of the Judge. (German ed., by H. Gottsched, 1905.)
2
Cp. J. Townsend, A Dissertation on the Poor Laws, by a Wellwisher of
Mankind (1817); quoted in Capital, 715.
On p. 711 (note 1) Marx quotes ‘the spirited and witty Abbé Galiani’ as
holding similar views: ‘Thus it comes to pass’, Galiani says, ‘that the men who
practise occupations of primary utility breed abundantly.’ See Galiani, Della
Moneta, 1803, p. 78.

The fact that even in Western countries, Christianity is not yet entirely free
from the spirit of defending the return to the closed society ‘of reaction and
oppression can be seen from the excellent polemic of H. G. Wells against Dean
Inge’s biased and pro-fascist attitude towards the Spanish civil war. Cp. H. G.
Wells, The Common Sense of War and Peace (1940), pp. 38-40. (In referring to
Wells’s book, I do not wish to associate myself with anything he says on
federation, whether critical or constructive; and especially not with the idea
propounded on pp. 56 ff., regarding fully empowered world commissions. The
fascist dangers involved in this idea seem to me enormous.) On the other hand,
there is the opposite danger, that of a pro-communist Church; cp. note 12 to
chapter 9.
3
Cp. Kierkegaard, op. cit., 172.
4
But Kierkegaard said something of Luther that may be true of Marx also:
‘Luther’s corrective idea .. produces .. the most sophisticated form of ..
paganism.’ (Op. cit., 147.)
5
Cp. H.o.M., 231 (= Ludwig Feuerbach, 56); cp. notes II and 14 to chapter
13.
6
Cp. note 14 to chapter 13, and text.
7
Cp. my The Poverty of Historicism, section 19.
8
Cp. H.o.M., 247 f. (= GA, Special Volume, 97).
9
For these quotations, cp. H.o.M., 248, and 279 (the latter passage is
shortened = GA, Special Volume, 97 and 277).
10
Cp. L. Laurat, Marxism and Democracy, p. 16. (Italics mine.)
11
For these two quotations, cp. The Churches Survey Their Task (1937), p.
130, and A. Loewe, The Universities in Transformation (1940), p. i. With the
concluding remark of this chapter, cp. also the views expressed by Parkes in the
last sentences of his criticism of Marxism (Marxism—A Post Mortem, 1940, p.
208).

Notes To Chapter 23
1

Concerning Mannheim, see especially Ideology and Utopia (quoted here
from the German ed., 1929). The terms ‘social habitat’ and ‘total ideology’ are
both due to Mannheim; the terms ‘sociologism’ and ‘historism’ have been
mentioned in the last chapter. The idea of a ‘social habitat’ is Platonic.
For a criticism of Mannheim’s Man and Society in an Age of
Reconstruction (1941), which combines historicist tendencies with a romantic
and even mystical holism, see my The Poverty of Historicism, II (Economica,
1944).
2
Cp. my interpretation in What is Dialectic? (Mind, 49, especially p. 414;
also Conjectures and Refutations, especially p. 325.)
3
This is Mannheim’s term (cp. Ideology and Utopia, 1929, p. 35). For the
‘freely poised intelligence’, see op. cit., p. 123, where this term is attributed to
Alfred Weber. For the theory of an intelligentsia loosely anchored in tradition,
see op. cit., pp. 121-34, and especially p. 122.
4
For the latter theory, or, rather, practice, cp. notes 51 and 52 to chapter 11.
5
Cp. What is Dialectic? (p. 417; Conjectures and Refutations, p. 327). Cp.
note 33 to chapter 12.
6
The analogy between the psycho-analytic method and that of Wittgenstein
is mentioned by Wisdom, Other Minds (Mind, vol. 49, p. 370, note): ‘A doubt

such as “I can never really know what another person is feeling” may arise from
more than one of these sources. This over-determination of sceptical symptoms
complicates their cure. The treatment is like psycho-analytic treatment (to
enlarge Wittgenstein’s analogy) in that the treatment is the diagnosis and the
diagnosis is the description, the very full description, of the symptoms.’ And so
on. (I may remark that, using the word ‘know’ in the ordinary sense, we can, of
course, never know what another person is feeling. We can only make
hypotheses about it. This solves the so-called problem. It is a mistake to speak
here of doubt, and a still worse mistake to attempt to remove the doubt by a
semiotico-analytic treatment.)
7
The psycho-analysts seem to hold the same of the individual
psychologists, and they are probably right. Cp. Freud’s History of the PsychoAnalytic Movement (1916), p. 42, where Freud records that Adler made the
following remark (which fits well within Adler’s individual-psychological
scheme, according to which feelings of inferiority are predominantly important):
‘Do you believe that it is such a pleasure for me to stand in your shadow my
whole life?’ This suggests that Adler had not successfully applied his theories to
himself, at that time at least. But the same seems to be true of Freud: None of
the founders of psycho-analysis were psycho-analysed. To this objection, they
usually replied that they had psycho-analysed themselves. But they would never
have accepted such an excuse from anybody else; and, indeed, rightly so.
8
For the following analysis of scientific objectivity, cp. my The Logic of
Scientific Discovery, section 8 (pp. 44 ff.).
9
I wish to apologize to the Kantians for mentioning them in the same breath
as the Hegelians.
10
Cp. notes 23 to chapter 8 and 39 (second paragraph) to chapter 11.
11
Cp. notes 34 ff., to chapter 11.
12
Cp. K. Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia (German ed., p. 167).
13
For the first of these two quotations, cp. op. cit., 167. (For simplicity’s
sake, I translate ‘conscious’ for ‘reflexive’.) For the second, cp. op. cit., 166.
14
Cp. Handbook of Marxism, 255 (= GA, Special Volume, 117-18): ‘Hegel
was the first to state correctly the relation between freedom and necessity. To
him, freedom is the appreciation of necessity.’ For Hegel’s own formulation of
his pet idea, cp. Hegel Selections, 213 (= Werke, 1832-1887, vi, 310): ‘The truth
of necessity, therefore, is freedom.’ 361 (= WW, xi, 46): ‘.. the Christian
principle of self-consciousness—Freedom.” 362 (= WW, xi, 47): ‘The essential
nature of freedom, which involves in it absolute necessity, is to be displayed as
the attainment of a consciousness of itself (for it is in its very nature, selfconsciousness) and it thereby realizes its existence.” And so on.

Notes To Chapter 24
1

I am here using the term ‘rationalism’ in opposition to ‘irrationalism’ and
not to ‘empiricism’. Carnap writes in his Der Logische Aufbau der Welt (1928),
p. 260: ‘The word “rationalism” is now often meant .. in a modern sense: in
contradistinction to irrationalism.’
In using the term ‘rationalism’ in this way, I do not wish to suggest that the
other way of using this term, namely, in opposition to empiricism, is perhaps
less important. On the contrary, I believe that this opposition characterizes one
of the most interesting problems of philosophy. But I do not intend to deal with

it here; and I feel that, in opposition to empiricism, we might do better to use
another term—perhaps ‘intellectualism’ or ‘intellectual intuitionism ‘—in place
of ‘rationalism’ in the Cartesian sense. I may mention in this context that I do
not define the terms ‘reason’ or ‘rationalism’; I am using them as labels, taking
care that nothing depends on the words used. Cp. chapter 11, especially note 50.
(For the reference to Kant, see note 56 to chapter 12, and text.)
2
* This is what I tried to do in Towards a Rational Theory of Tradition
(The Rationalist Annual, 1949, pp. 36 ff., and now in Conjectures and
Refutations, pp. 120 ff.).
3
Cp. Plato’s Timaeus 516. (See also the cross-references in note 33 to
chapter 11.)
4
Cp. chapter 10, especially notes 38-41, and text.
In Pythagoras, Heraclitus, Parmenides, Plato, mystical and rationalist
elements are mixed. Plato especially, in spite of all his emphasis on ‘reason’,
incorporated into his philosophy such a weighty admixture of irrationalism that
it nearly ousted the rationalism he inherited from Socrates. This enabled the
Neo-Platonists to base their mysticism on Plato; and most subsequent mysticism
goes back to these sources.
It may perhaps be accidental, but it is in any case remarkable that there is
still a cultural frontier between Western Europe and the regions of Central
Europe which coincide very nearly with those regions that did not come under
the administration of Augustus’ Roman Empire, and that did not enjoy the
blessings of the Roman peace, i.e. of the Roman civilization. The same
‘barbarian’ regions are particularly prone to be affected by mysticism, even
though they did not invent mysticism. Bernard of Clairvaux had his greatest
successes in Germany, where later Eckhart and his school flourished, and also
Boehme.
Much later Spinoza, who attempted to combine Cartesian intellectualism
with mystical tendencies, rediscovered the theory of a mystical intellectual
intuition, which, in spite of Kant’s strong opposition, led to the post-Kantian rise
of ‘Idealism’, to Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel. Practically all modern
irrationalism goes back to the latter, as is briefly indicated in chapter 12. (Cp.
also notes 6, 29-32 and 58, below, and notes 32-33 to chapter 11, and the crossreferences on mysticism there given.)
5
With the ‘mechanical activities’, cp. notes 21 and 22 to this chapter.
6
I say ‘discarded’ in order to cover the views (1) that such an assumption
would be false, (2) that it would be unscientific (or impermissible), though it
might perhaps be accidentally true, (3) that it would be ‘senseless’ or
‘meaningless’, for example in the sense of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus; cp. note 51
to chapter 12, and note 8 (2) to the present chapter.
In connection with the distinction between ‘critical’ and ‘uncritical’
rationalism, it may be mentioned that the teaching of Duns Scotus as well as of
Kant could be interpreted as approaching ‘critical’ rationalism. (I have in mind
their doctrines of the ‘primacy of will’, which may be interpreted as the primacy
of an irrational decision.)
7
In this and the following note a few remarks on paradoxes will be made,
especially on the paradox of the liar. In introducing these remarks, it may be
said that the so-called ‘logical’ and ‘semantical’ paradoxes are no longer merely
playthings for the logicians. Not only have they proved to be important for the
development of mathematics, but they are also becoming important in other

fields of thought. There is a definite connection between these paradoxes and
such problems as the paradox of freedom which, as we have seen (cp. note 20 to
chapter 17 and notes 4 and 6 to chapter 7), is of considerable significance in
political philosophy. In point (4) of this note, it will be briefly shown that the
various paradoxes of sovereignty (cp. note 6 to chapter 7, and text) are very
similar to the paradox of the liar. On the modern methods of solving these
paradoxes (or perhaps better: of constructing languages in which they do not
occur), I shall not make any comments here, since it would take us beyond the
scope of this book.
(1) The paradox of the liar can be formulated in many ways. One of them is
this. Let us assume that somebody says one day: ‘All that I say to-day is a lie; or
more precisely: ‘All statements I make to-day are false’; and that he says
nothing else the whole day. Now if we ask ourselves whether he spoke the truth,
this is what we find. If we start with the assumption that what he said was true,
then we arrive, considering what he said, at the result that it must have been
false. And if we start with the assumption that what he said was false, then we
must conclude, considering what he said, that it was true.
(2) Paradoxes are sometimes called ‘contradictions’. But this is perhaps
slightly misleading. An ordinary contradiction (or a self-contradiction) is simply
a logically false statement, such as ‘Plato was happy yesterday and he was not
happy yesterday’. If we assume that such a sentence is false, no further difficulty
arises. But of a paradox, we can neither assume that it is true nor that it is false,
without getting involved in difficulties.
(3) There are, however, statements which are closely related to paradoxes,
but which are, more strictly speaking, only self-contradictions. Take for example
the statement: ‘All statements are false.’ If we assume that this statement is true,
then we arrive, considering what it says, at the result that it is false. But if we
assume that it is false, then we are out of the difficulty; for this assumption leads
only to the result that not all statements are false, or in other words, that there
are some statements—at least one—that are true. And this result is harmless; for
it does not imply that our original statement is one of the true ones. (This does
not imply that we can, in fact, construct a language free of paradoxes in which
‘All statements are false’ or ‘All statements are true’ can be formulated.)
In spite of the fact that this statement ‘All propositions are false’ is not
really a paradox, it may be called, by courtesy, ‘a form of the paradox of the
liar’, because of its obvious resemblance to the latter; and indeed, the old Greek
formulation of this paradox (Epimenides the Cretan says: ‘All Cretans always
lie’) is, in this terminology, rather ‘a form of the paradox of the liar’ i.e. a
contradiction rather than a paradox. (Cp. also next note, and note 54 to this
chapter, and text.)
(4) I shall now show briefly the similarity between the paradox of the liar
and the various paradoxes of sovereignty, for example, of the principle that the
best or the wisest or the majority should rule. (Cp. note 6 to chapter 7 and text.)
C. H. Langford has described various ways of putting the paradox of the
liar, among them the following. We consider two statements, made by two
people, A and B.
A says: ‘What B says is true.’ B says: ‘What A says is false.’
By applying the method described above, we easily convince ourselves that
each of these sentences is paradoxical. Now we consider the following two
sentences, of which the first is the principle that the wisest should rule:

(A) The principle says: What the wisest says under (B) should be law.
(B) The wisest says: What the principle states under (A) should not be law.
8
(1) That the principle of avoiding all presuppositions is ‘a form of the
paradox of the liar’ in the sense of note 7 (3) to this chapter, and therefore selfcontradictory, will be easily seen if we describe it like this. A philosopher starts
his investigation by assuming without argument the principle: ‘All principles
assumed without argument are impermissible.’ It is clear that if we assume that
this principle is true, we must conclude, considering what it says, that it is
impermissible. (The opposite assumption does not lead to any difficulty.) The
remark ‘a counsel of perfection’ alludes to the usual criticism of this principle
which was laid down, for example, by Husserl. J. Laird (Recent Philosophy,
1936, p. 121) writes about this principle that it ‘is a cardinal feature of Husserl’s
philosophy. Its success may be more doubtful, for presuppositions have a way of
creeping in.’ So far, I fully agree; but not quite with the next remark: ‘. . the
avoidance of all presuppositions may well be a counsel of perfection,
impracticable in an inadvertent world.” (See also note 5 to chapter 25.)
(2) We may consider at this place a few further ‘principles’ which are in the
sense of note 7 (3) to this chapter, ‘forms of the paradox of the liar’, and
therefore self-contradictory.
(a) From the point of view of social philosophy, the following ‘principle of
sociologism’ (and the analogous ‘principle of historism’) are of interest. They
can be formulated in this way. ‘No statement is absolutely true, and all
statements are inevitably relative to the social (or historical) habitat of their
originators.’ It is clear that the considerations of note 7 (3) apply practically
without alteration. For if we assume that such a principle is true, then it follows
that it is not true but only ‘relative to the social or historical habitat of its
originator’. See also note 53 to this chapter, and text.
(b) Some examples of this kind can be found in Wittgenstein’s Tractatus.
The one is Wittgenstein’s proposition (quoted more fully in note 46 to chapter
11): ‘The totality of true propositions is .. the totality of natural science.’ Since
this proposition does not belong to natural science (but, rather, to a metascience, i.e. a theory that speaks about science) it follows that it asserts its own
untruth, and is therefore contradictory.
Furthermore, it is clear that this proposition violates Wittgenstein’s own
principle (Tractatus, p. 57), ‘No proposition can say anything about itself ...’
* But even this last quoted principle which I shall call ‘W’ turns out to be a
form of the paradox of the liar, and to assert its own untruth. (It therefore can
hardly be—as Wittgenstein believes it to be—equivalent to, or a summary of, or
a substitute for, ‘the whole theory of types’, i.e. Russell’s theory, designed to
avoid the paradoxes which he discovered by dividing expressions which look
like propositions into three classes—true propositions, false propositions, and
meaningless expressions or pseudo-propositions.) For Wittgenstein’s principle
W may be re-formulated as follows: (W+) Every expression (and especially one
that looks like a proposition) which contains a reference to itself—either by
containing its own name or an individual variable ranging over a class to which
it itself belongs—is not a proposition (but a meaningless pseudo-proposition).
Now let us assume that W+ is true. Then, considering the fact that it is an
expression, and that it refers to every expression, it cannot be a proposition, and
is therefore a fortiori not true.

The assumption that it is true is therefore untenable; W+ cannot be true. But
this does not show that it must be false; for both, the assumption that it is false
and the other that it is a meaningless (or senseless) expression, do not involve us
in immediate difficulties.
Wittgenstein might perhaps say that he saw this himself when he wrote (p.
189; cp. note 51 (1) to chapter 11): ‘My propositions are elucidatory in this way:
he who understands me finally recognizes them as senseless ..’; in any case, we
may conjecture that he would incline to describing W+ as meaningless rather
than false. I believe, however, that it is not meaningless but simply false. Or
more precisely, I believe that in every formalized language (e.g. in one in which
Gödel’s undecidable statements can be expressed) which contains means for
speaking about its own expressions, and in which we have names of classes of
expressions such as ‘propositions’ and ‘non-propositions’, the formalization of a
statement which, like W+, asserts its own meaninglessness, will be selfcontradictory and neither meaningless nor genuinely paradoxical; it will be a
meaningful proposition merely because it asserts of every expression of a certain
kind that it is not a proposition (i.e. not a well-formed formula); and such an
assertion will be true or false, but not meaningless, simply because to be (or not
to be) a well-formed proposition is a property of expressions. For example, ‘All
expressions are meaningless’ will be self-contradictory, but not genuinely
paradoxical, and so will be the expression ‘The expression x is meaningless’, if
we substitute for ‘x’ a name of this expression. Modifying an idea of J. N.
Findlay’s, we can write:
The expression obtained by substituting for the variable in the following
expression, ‘The expression obtained by substituting for the variable in the
following expression x the quotation name of this expression, is not a statement’,
the quotation name of this expression, is not a statement.
And what we have just written turns out to be a self-contradictory
statement. (If we write twice ‘is a false statement’ instead of is not a statement’,
we obtain a paradox of the liar; if we write ‘is a non-demonstrable statement’,
we obtain a Gödelian statement in J. N. Findlay’s writing.)
To sum up. Contrary to first impressions, we find that a theory which
implies its own meaninglessness is not meaningless but false, since the predicate
‘meaningless’, as opposed to ‘false’, does not give rise to paradoxes. And
Wittgenstein’s theory is therefore not meaningless, as he believes, but simply
false (or, more specifically, self-contradictory).
(3) It has been claimed by some positivists that a tripartition of the
expressions of a language into (i) true statements, (ii) false statements, and (iii)
meaningless expressions (or, better, expressions other than well-formed
statements), is more or less ‘natural’ and that it provides, because of their
meaninglessness, for the elimination of the paradoxes and, at the same time, of
metaphysical systems. The following may show that this tripartition is not
enough.
The General’s Chief Counter-Espionage Officer is provided with three
boxes, labelled (i) ‘General’s Box’, (ii) ‘Enemy’s Box’ (to be made accessible to
the enemy’s spies), and (iii) ‘Waste Paper’, and is instructed to distribute all
information arriving before 12 o’clock among these three boxes, according to
whether this information is (i) true, (ii) false, or (iii) meaningless.
For a time, he receives information which he can easily distribute (among it
true statements of the theory of natural numbers, etc., and perhaps statements of

logic such as L: ‘From a set of true statements, no false statement can be validly
derived’). The last message M, arriving with the last incoming mail just before
12 o’clock, disturbs him a little, for M reads: ‘From the set of all statements
placed, or to be placed, within the box labelled “General’s Box”, the statement
“0 = 1” cannot validly be derived.’ At first, the Chief Counter-Espionage Officer
hesitates whether he should not put M into box (ii). But since he realizes that, if
put into (ii), M would supply the enemy with valuable true information, he
ultimately decides to put M into (i).
But this turns out to be a big mistake. For the symbolic logicians (experts in
logistic?) on the General’s staff, after formalizing (and ‘arithmetizing’) the
contents of the General’s box, discover that they obtain a set of statements
which contains an assertion of its own consistency; and this, according to
Gödel’s second theorem on decidability, leads to a contradiction, so that ‘0 = 2’
can actually be deduced from the presumably true information supplied to the
General.
The solution of this difficulty consists in the recognition of the fact that the
tripartition-claim is unwarranted, at least for ordinary languages; and we can see
from Tarski’s theory of truth that no definite number of boxes will suffice. At
the same time we find that ‘meaninglessness’ in the sense of ‘not belonging to
the well-formed formulae’ is by no means an indication of ‘nonsensical talk’ in
the sense of ‘words which just don’t mean anything, although they may pretend
to be deeply significant’; but to have revealed that metaphysics was just of this
character was the chief claim of the positivists.*
9
It appears that it was the difficulty connected with the so-called ‘problem
of induction’ which led Whitehead to the disregard of argument displayed in
Process and Reality. (Cp. also notes 35-7 to this chapter.)
10
It is a moral decision and not merely ‘a matter of taste’ since it is not a
private affair but affects other men and their lives. (For the opposition between
aesthetic matters of taste and moral problems, cp. text to note 6 to chapter 5, and
chapter 9 especially text to notes 10-11.) The decision with which we are faced
is most important from the point of view that the ‘learned’, who are faced with
it, act as intellectual trustees for those who are not faced with it.
11
It is, I believe, perhaps the greatest strength of Christianity that it appeals
fundamentally not to abstract speculation but to the imagination, by describing
in a very concrete manner the suffering of man.
12
Kant, the great equalitarian in regard to moral decisions, has emphasized
the blessings involved in the fact of human inequality. He saw in the variety and
individuality of human characters and opinions one of the main conditions of
moral as well as material progress.
13
The allusion is to A. Huxley’s Brave New World.
14
For the distinction between facts, and decisions or demands, cp. text to
notes 5 ff. to chapter 4. For the ‘language of political demands’ (or ‘proposals’
in the sense of L. J. Russell) cp. text to notes 41-43, chapter 6 and note 5(3) to
chapter 5.
I should be inclined to say that the theory of the innate intellectual equality
of all men is false; but since such men as Niels Bohr contend that the influence
of environment is alone responsible for individual differences, and since there
are no sufficient experimental data for deciding this question, ‘probably false’ is
perhaps all that should be said.

15

See, for example, the passage from Plato’s Statesman, quoted in the text
to note 12 to chapter 9. Another such passage is Republic, 409e-410a. After
having spoken (409b & c) of the’ good judge .. who is good because of the
goodness of his soul’, Plato continues (409e, f.), ‘And are you not going to
establish physicians and judges .. who are to look after those citizens whose
physical and mental constitution is healthy and good? Those whose physical
health is bad, they will leave to die. And those whose soul is bad-natured and
incurable, they will actually kill.”—’ Yes,’ he said, ‘since you have proved that
this is the best thing, both for those to whom it happens, and for the state.’
16
Cp. notes 58 to chapter 8 and 28 to chapter 10.
17
An example is H. G. Wells, who gave to the first chapter of his book, The
Common Sense of War and Peace, the excellent title: Grown Men Do Not Need
Leaders. (Cp. also note 2 to chapter 22.)
18
For the problem and the paradox of tolerance, cp. note 4 to chapter 7.
19
The ‘world’ is not rational, but it is the task of science to rationalize it.
‘Society’ is not rational, but it is the task of the social engineer to rationalize it.
(This does not mean, of course, that he should ‘direct’ it, or that centralized or
collectivist ‘planning’ is desirable.) Ordinary language is not rational, but it is
our task to rationalize it, or at least to keep up its standards of clarity. The
attitude here characterized could be described as ‘pragmatic rationalism’. This
pragmatic rationalism is related to an uncritical rationalism and to irrationalism
in a similar way as critical rationalism is related to these two. For an uncritical
rationalism may argue that the world is rational and that the task of science is to
discover this rationality, while an irrationalist may insist that the world, being
fundamentally irrational, should be experienced and exhausted by our emotions
and passions (or by our intellectual intuition) rather than by scientific methods.
As opposed to this, pragmatic rationalism may recognize that the world is not
rational, but demand that we submit or subject it to reason, as far as possible.
Using Carnap’s words (Der Logische Aufbau, etc., 1928, p. vi) one could
describe what I call ‘pragmatic rationalism’ as ‘the attitude which strives for
clarity everywhere but recognizes the never fully understandable or never fully
rational entanglement of the events of life’.
20
For the problem of the standards of clarity of our language, cp. the last
note and note 30 to chapter 12.
21
Industrialization and the Division of Labour are attacked, for example, by
Toynbee, A Study of History, vol. I, pp. 2 ff. Toynbee complains (p. 4) that’ the
prestige of the Industrial System imposed itself upon the “intellectual workers”
of the Western World . .; and when they have attempted to “work” these
materials “up” into “manufactured” or “semi-manufactured” articles, they have
had recourse, once again, to the Division of Labour . .’ In another place (p. 2)
Toynbee says of physical scientific periodicals: ‘Those periodicals were the
Industrial System “in book form”, with its Division of Labour and its sustained
maximum output of articles manufactured from raw materials mechanically.’
(Italics mine.) Toynbee emphasizes (p. 3, note 2) with the Hegelian Dilthey that
the spiritual sciences at least should keep apart from these methods. (He quotes
Dilthey, who said: ‘The real categories .. are nowhere the same in the sciences
of the Spirit as they are in the sciences of Nature.’)
Toynbee’s interpretation of the division of labour in the field of science
seems to me just as mistaken as Dilthey’s attempt to open up a gulf between the
methods of the natural and the social sciences. What Toynbee calls ‘division of

labour’ could better be described as co-operation and mutual criticism. Cp. text
to notes 8 f. to chapter 23, and Macmurray’s comments upon scientific cooperation quoted in the present chapter, text to note 26. (For Toynbee’s antirationalism, cp. also note 61 to chapter 11.)
22
Cp. Adolf Keller, Church and State on the European Continent (Beckly
Social Service Lecture, 1936). I owe it to Mr. L. Webb that my attention has
been drawn to this interesting passage.
23
For moral futurism as a kind of moral positivism, cp. chapter 22
(especially text to notes 9 ff.).
I may draw attention to the fact that in contradistinction to the present
fashion (cp. notes 51 f. to chapter 11), I attempt to take Keller’s remarks
seriously and question their truth, instead of dismissing them, as the positivist
fashion would demand, as meaningless.
24
Cp. note 70 to chapter 10 and text, and note 61 to chapter 11.
25
Cp. Matthew 7, 15 f.: ‘Beware of false prophets, which come to you in
sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by
their fruits.”
26
The two passages are from J. Macmurray, The Clue to History (1938), pp.
86 and 192. (For my disagreement with Macmurray cp. text to note 16 to chapter
25.)
27
Cp. L. S. Stebbing’s book, Philosophy and the Physicists, and my own
brief remark on the Hegelianism of Jeans in What is Dialectic? (Mind, 1940, 49,
p. 420; now in Conjectures and Refutations, p. 330).
28
Cp., for example, notes 8-12 to chapter 7, and text.
29
Cp. chapter 10, especially the end of that chapter, i.e. notes 59-70, and
text (see especially the reference to McTaggart in note 59); the note to the
Introduction; notes 33 to chapter 11 and 36 to chapter 12; notes 4, 6, and 58 to
the present chapter. See also Wittgenstein’s insistence (quoted in note 32 to the
present chapter) that the contemplation of, or the feeling for, the world as a
limited whole is the mystical feeling.
A much-discussed recent work on mysticism and its proper role in politics
is Aldous Huxley’s Grey Eminence. It is interesting mainly because the author
does not seem to realize that his own story of the mystic and politician, Father
Joseph, flatly refutes the main thesis of his book. This thesis is that training in
mystical practice is the only educational discipline known that is capable of
securing to men that absolutely firm moral and religious ground which is so
dearly needed by people who influence public policy. But his own story shows
that Father Joseph, in spite of his training, fell into temptation—the usual
temptation of those who wield power—and that he was unable to resist; absolute
power corrupted him absolutely. That is to say, the only historical evidence
discussed at any length by the author disproves his thesis completely; which,
however, does not seem to worry him.
30
Cp. F. Kafka, The Great Wall of China (English transl. by E. Muir, 1933),
p. 236.
31
Cp. also note 19 to this chapter.
32
Cp. Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, p. 187: ‘Not how the world is, is the
mystical, but that it is.—The contemplation of the world sub specie aeterni is its
contemplation as a limited whole.—The feeling of the world as a limited whole
is the mystical feeling.’ One sees that Wittgenstein’s mysticism is typically
holistic.—For other passages of Wittgenstein (loc. cit.) like: ‘There is indeed the

inexpressible. This shows itself; it is the mystical’, cp. Carnap’s criticism in his
Logical Syntax of Language (1937), p. 314 f. Cp. also note 25 to chapter 25, and
text. See also note 29 to the present chapter and the cross-references given there.
33
Cp. chapter 10, for example notes 40, 41. The tribal and esoteric tendency
of this kind of philosophy may be exemplified by a quotation from H. Blueher
(cp. Kolnai, The War against the West, p. 74, italics mine): ‘Christianity is
emphatically an aristocratic creed, free of morals, unteachable. The Christians
know one another by their exterior type; they form a set in human society who
never fail in mutual understanding, and who are understood by none but
themselves. They constitute a secret league. Furthermore, the kind of love that
operates in Christianity is that which illuminates the pagan temples; it bears no
relation to the Jewish invention of so-called love of mankind or love of one’s
neighbours.’ Another example may be taken from E. von Salomon’s book, The
Outlaws (quoted also in note 90 to chapter 12; the present quotation is from p.
240; italics mine): ‘We recognized one another in an instant, though we came
from all parts of the Reich, having got wind of skirmishes and of danger.’
34
This remark is not meant in a historicist sense. I do not mean to prophesy
that the conflict will play no part in future developments. I only mean that by
now we could have learned that the problem does not exist, or that it is, at any
rate, insignificant as compared with the problem of the evil religions, such as
totalitarianism and racialism, with which we are faced.
35
I am alluding to Principia Mathematica, by A. N. Whitehead and B.
Russell. (Whitehead says, in Process and Reality, p. 10, note 1, that the
‘introductory discussions are practically due to Russell, and in the second
edition wholly so’.)
36
Cp. the reference to Hegel (and many others, among them Plato and
Aristotle) in A. N. Whitehead, Process and Reality, p. 14.
37
Cp. Whitehead, op. cit., pp. 18 f.
38
Cp. Kant’s Appendix to his Prolegomena. (Works, ed. by Cassirer, vol.
IV, 132 f. For the translation ‘crazy quilt’, cp. Carus’ English edition of Kant’s
Prolegomena, 1902 and 1912, p. iv.)
39
Cp. Whitehead, Process and Reality, p. 20 f.
Concerning the attitude of take it or leave it, described in the next
paragraph, cp. note 53 to chapter 11.
40
Cp. Whitehead, op. cit., 492. Two of the other antitheses are: ‘It is as true
to say that the World is immanent in God, as that God is immanent in the World
... It is as true to say that God creates the World, as that the World creates God.’
This is very reminiscent of the German mystic Scheffler (Angelus Silesius), who
wrote: ‘I am as great as God, God is as small as me, I cannot without him, nor
he without me, be.’
Concerning my remark, later in the paragraph, that I just do not understand
what the author wishes to convey, I may say that it was only with great
reluctance that I wrote this. The ‘I do not understand’ criticism is a rather cheap
and dangerous kind of sport. I simply wrote these words because, in spite of my
efforts, they remained true.
41
Cp. Kant’s letter to Mendelssohn of April 8th, 1766. (Works, ed. by
Cassirer, vol. IX, 56 f.)
42
Cp. Toynbee, A Study of History, vol. VI, 536 f.
43
Toynbee says (op. cit., 537) of the ‘traditionally orthodox minds’ that
they ‘will see our investigation as an attack upon the historicity of the story of

Jesus Christ as it is presented in the Gospels’. And he holds (p. 538) that God
reveals himself through poetry as well as through truth; according to his theory,
God has ‘revealed himself in folk-lore’.
44
Following up this attempt to apply Toynbee’s methods to himself, one
could ask whether his Study of History which he has planned to consist of
thirteen volumes is not just as much what he terms a tour de force as the
‘histories like the several series of volumes now in course of publication by the
Cambridge University Press ‘—undertakings which he brilliantly compares (vol.
I, p. 4) to ‘stupendous tunnels and bridges and dams and liners and battleships
and skyscrapers’. And one could ask whether Toynbee’s tour de force is not,
more particularly, the manufacturing of what he calls a ‘time machine’, i.e. an
escape into the past. (Cp. especially Toynbee’s medievalism, briefly discussed
in note 61 to chapter 11. Cp. further note 54 to the present chapter.)
45
I have not so far seen more than the first six volumes. Einstein is one of
the few scientists mentioned.
46
Toynbee, op. cit., vol. II, 178.
47
Toynbee, op. cit., vol. V, 581 ff. (Italics mine.)
In connection with Toynbee’s neglect, mentioned in the text, of the Marxian
doctrines and especially of the Communist Manifesto, it may be said that on p.
179 (note 5) of this volume, Toynbee writes: ‘The Bolshevik or Majoritarian
wing of the Russian Social-Democratic Party renamed itself “the Russian
Communist Party” (in homage to the Paris Commune of A.D. 1871) in March,
1918 ..’ A similar remark can be found in the same volume, p. 582, note i.
But this is not correct. The change of name (which was submitted by Lenin
to the party conference of April, 1917; cp. Handbook of Marxism, 783; cp. also
p. 787) referred, obviously enough, to the fact that ‘Marx and Engels called
themselves Communists’, as Lenin puts it, and to the Communist Manifesto.
48
Cp. Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (see note 9 to chapter 13).
For two historical roots of Marx’s communism (Plato’s and, perhaps,
Pythagoras’—archaism, and the Acts, which seem to be influenced by it) see
especially note 29 to chapter 5; see also notes 30 to chapter 4, 34-36 to chapter
6, and notes 3 and 8 to chapter 13 (and text).
49
Cp. Toynbee, op. cit., vol. V, 587.
50
Cp. chapter 22, especially text to notes 1-4, and the end of that chapter.
51
The passage is not isolated; Toynbee very often expresses his respect for
the ‘verdict of history’; a fact that is in keeping with his doctrine that it is ‘the
claim of Christianity .. that God has revealed Himself in history’. This ‘Neoprotestant doctrine’ (as K. Barth calls it) will be discussed in the next chapter.
(Cp. especially note 12 to that chapter.)
In connection with Toynbee’s treatment of Marx, it may be mentioned that
his whole approach is strongly influenced by Marxism. He says (op. cit., vol. I,
p. 41, note 3): ‘More than one of these Marxian coinages have become current
even among people who reject the Marxian dogmas.’ This statement refers
especially to the use of the word ‘proletariat’. But it covers more than the mere
use of words.
52
Cp. Toynbee, op. cit., vol. III, 476. The passage refers back to vol. I, part
I, A, The Relativity of Historical Thought. (The problem of the ‘relativity’ of
historical thought will be discussed in the next chapter.) For an excellent early
criticism of historical relativism (and historicism), see H. Sidgwick’s
Philosophy—Its Scope and Relations (1902), Lecture IX, especially p. 180 f.

53

For if all thought is in such a sense ‘inevitably relative’ to its historical
habitat that it is not ‘absolutely true’ (i.e. not true), then this must hold for this
contention as well. Thus it cannot be true, and therefore not an inevitable ‘Law
of Human Nature’. Cp. also note 8 (2, a) to this chapter.
54
For the contention that Toynbee escapes into the past, cp. note 44 to this
chapter and note 61 to chapter 11 (on Toynbee’s medievalism). Toynbee himself
gives an excellent criticism of archaism, and I fully agree with his attack (vol.
VI, 65 f.) upon nationalist attempts to revive ancient languages, especially in
Palestine. But Toynbee’s own attack upon industrialism (cp. note 21 to the
present chapter) seems to be no less archaistic.—For an escape into the future, I
have no other evidence than Toynbee’s announced prophetic title of part XII of
his work: The Prospects of the Western Civilization.
55
The ‘tragic worldly success of the founder of Islam’ is mentioned by
Toynbee in op. cit., III, p. 472. For Ignatius Loyola, cp. vol. III, 270; 466 f.
56
Cp. op. cit., vol. V, 590.—The passage quoted next is from the same
volume, p. 588.
57
Toynbee, op. cit., vol. VI, 13.
58
Cp. Toynbee, vol. VI, 12 f. (The reference is to Bergson’s Two Sources of
Morality and Religion.’)
The following historicist quotation from Toynbee (vol. V, 585; italics mine)
is interesting in this context: ‘Christians believe—and a study of History
assuredly proves them right—that the brotherhood of Man is impossible for Man
to achieve in any other way than by enrolling himself as a citizen of a Civitas
Dei which transcends the human world and has God himself for its king.’ How
can a study of history prove such a claim? Is it not a highly responsible matter to
assert that it can be proved?
Concerning Bergson’s Two Sources, I fully agree that there is an irrational
or intuitive element in every creative thought; but this element can be found in
rational scientific thought also. Rational thought is not non-intuitive; it is, rather,
intuition submitted to tests and checks (as opposed to intuition run wild).
Applying this to the problem of the creation of the open society, I admit that
men like Socrates were inspired by intuition; but while I grant this fact, I believe
that it is their rationality by which the founders of the open society are
distinguished from those who tried to arrest its development, and who were also,
like Plato, inspired by intuition—only by an intuition unchecked by
reasonableness (in the sense in which this term has been used in the present
chapter). See also the note to the Introduction.
59
Cp. note 4 to chapter 18.

Notes To Chapter 25
1

The so-called conventionalists (H. Poincaré, P. Duhem, and more recently,
A. Eddington); cp. note 17 to chapter 5.
2
Cp. my The Logic of Scientific Discovery.
3
The ‘bucket theory of the mind’ has been mentioned in chapter 23. ( For
the ‘searchlight theory of science’, see also my Towards a Rational Theory of
Tradition, now in my Conjectures and Refutations, especially pp. 127 f.*) The
‘searchlight theory’ contains, perhaps, just those elements of Kantianism that are
tenable. We might say that Kant’s mistake was to think the searchlight itself
incapable of improvement; and that he did not sec that some searchlights

(theories) may fail to illuminate facts which others bring out clearly. But this is
how we give up using certain searchlights, and make progress.
4
Cp. note 23 to chapter 8.
5
For the attempt to avoid all presuppositions, cp. the criticism (of Husserl)
in note 8 (1) to chapter 24, and text. The naive idea that it is possible to avoid
presupposition (or a point of view) has also been attacked on different lines by
H. Gomperz. (Cp. Weltanschauungslehre, I, 1905, pp. 33 and 35; my translation
is perhaps a little free.) Gomperz’s attack is directed against radical empiricists.
(Not against Husserl.) ‘A philosophic or scientific attitude towards facts’,
Gomperz writes, ‘is always an attitude of thought, and not merely an attitude of
enjoying the facts in the manner of a cow, or of contemplating facts in the
manner of a painter, or of being overwhelmed by the facts in the manner of a
visionary. We must therefore assume that the philosopher is not satisfied with
the facts as they are, but thinks about them ... Thus it seems clear that behind
that philosophical radicalism which pretends .. to go back to immediate facts or
data, there is always hidden an uncritical reception of traditional doctrines. For
some thoughts about the facts must occur even to these radicals; but since they
are unconscious of them to such a degree as to hold that they merely admit the
facts, we have no choice but to assume that their thoughts are .. uncritical.’ (Cp.
also the same author’s remarks on Interpretation in Erkenntnis, vol. 7, pp. 225
ff.)
6
Cp. Schopenhauer’s comments on history (Parerga, etc., vol. II, ch. XIX,
§ 238; Works, second German edition, vol. VI, p. 480).
7
(1) To my knowledge, the theory of causality sketched here in the text was
first presented in my book, Logik der Forschung (1935)—now translated as The
Logic of Scientific Discovery (1959). See pp. 59 f. of the translation. As here
translated, the original brackets have been eliminated, and numbers in brackets
as well as four brief passages in brackets have been added, partly in order to
make a somewhat compressed passage more intelligible, and partly (in the case
of the two last brackets) to make allowance for a point of view I had not clearly
seen in 1935, the point of view of what A. Tarski has called ‘semantics’. (See,
e.g., his Grundlegung der wissenschaftlichen Semantik, in Actes du Congres
International Philosophique, vol. III, Paris, 1937, pp. I ff., and R. Carnap,
Introduction to Semantics, 1942). Owing to Tarski’s development of the
foundations of semantics, I no longer hesitate (as I did when writing the book
referred to) to make full use of the terms ‘cause’ and ‘effect’. For these can be
defined, using Tarski’s concept of truth, by a semantic definition such as the
following: Event A is the cause of event B, and event B the effect of event A, if
and only if there exists a language in which we can formulate three propositions,
u, a, and b, such that u is a true universal law, a describes A, and b describes B,
and b is a logical consequence of u and a. (Here the term ‘event’ or ‘fact’ may
be defined by a semantic version of my definition of ‘event’ in my The Logic of
Scientific Discovery, pp. 88 ff., say, by the following definition: An event E is
the common designatum of a class of mutually translatable singular statements.)
(2) A few historical remarks concerning the problem of cause and effect
may be added here. The Aristotelian concept of cause (viz., his formal and
material cause, and his efficient cause; the final cause does not interest us here,
even though my remark holds good for it too) is typically essentialistic; the
problem is to explain change or motion, and it is explained by reference to the
hidden structure of things. This essentialism is still to be found in Bacon’s,

Descartes’, Locke’s, and even Newton’s views on this matter; but Descartes’
theory opens the way to a new view. He saw the essence of all physical bodies
in their spatial extension or geometrical shape, and concluded from this that the
only way in which bodies can act upon one another is by pushing; one moving
body necessarily pushes another from its place because both are extended, and
therefore cannot fill the same space. Thus the effect follows the cause by
necessity, and all truly causal explanation (of physical events) must be in terms
of push. This view was still assumed by Newton, who accordingly said about his
own theory of gravitation—which, of course, employs the idea of pull rather
than push—that nobody who knows anything of philosophy could possibly
consider it a satisfactory explanation; and it still remains influential in physics in
the form of a dislike of any kind of ‘action at a distance’.—Berkeley was the
first to criticize the explanation by hidden essences, whether these are
introduced to ‘explain’ Newton’s attraction, or whether they lead to a Cartesian
theory of push; he demanded that science should describe, rather than explain by
essential or necessary connections. This doctrine, which became one of the main
characteristics of positivism, lose its point if our theory of causal explanation is
adopted; for explanation becomes then a kind of description; it is a description
which makes use of universal hypotheses, initial conditions, and logical
deduction. To Hume (who was partly anticipated by Sextus Empiricus, AlGazzâli, and others) is due what may be called the most important contribution
to the theory of causation; he pointed out (as against the Cartesian view) that we
cannot know anything about a necessary connection between an event A and
another event B. All we can possibly know is that events of the kind A (or events
similar to A) have so far been followed by events of the kind B (or events similar
to B). We can know that, in point of fact, such events were connected; but since
we do not know that this connection is a necessary one, we can say only that it
has held good in the past. Our theory fully recognizes this Humean criticism.
But it differs from Hume (1) in that it explicitly formulates the universal
hypothesis that events of the kind A are always and everywhere followed by
events of the kind B; (2) that it asserts the truth of the statement that A is the
cause of B, provided that the universal hypothesis is true.—Hume, in other
words, only looked at the events A and B themselves; and he could not find any
trace of a causal link or a necessary connection between these two. But we add a
third thing, a universal law; and with respect to this aw, we may speak of a
causal link, or even of a necessary connection. We could, for example, define:
Event B is causally linked (or necessarily connected) with event A if and only if
A is the cause of B (in the sense of our semantic definition given above).—
Concerning the question of the truth of a universal law, we may say that there
are countless universal laws whose truth we never question in daily life; and
accordingly, there are also countless cases of causation where in daily life we
never question the ‘necessary causal link’. From the point of scientific method,
the position is different. For we can never rationally establish the truth of
scientific laws; all we can do is to test them severely, and to eliminate the false
ones (this is perhaps the crux of my The Logic of Scientific Discovery).
Accordingly, all scientific laws retain for ever a hypothetical character; they are
assumptions. And consequently, all statements about specific causal connections
retain the same hypothetical character. We can never be certain (in a scientific
sense) that A is the cause of B, precisely because we can never be certain
whether the universal hypothesis in question is true, however well it may be

tested. Yet, we shall be inclined to find the specific hypothesis that A is the
cause of B the more acceptable the better we have tested and confirmed the
corresponding universal hypothesis. (For my theory of confirmation, see chapter
X and also appendix *ix of The Logic of Scientific Discovery, especially p. 275,
where the temporal coefficients or indices of confirmation sentences are
discussed.)
(3) Concerning my theory of historical explanation, developed here in the
text (further below), I wish to add some critical comments to an article by
Morton G. White, entitled Historical Explanation and published in Mind (vol.
52, 1943, pp. 212 ff.). The author accepts my analysis of causal explanation, as
originally developed in my Logik der Forschung (now translated as The Logic of
Scientific Discovery). (He mistakenly attributes this theory to an article by C. G.
Hempel, published in the Journal of Philosophy, 1942; see, however, Hempel’s
review of my book in Deutsche Literaturzeitung, 1937, (8), pp. 310 to 314.)
Having found what in general we call an explanation, White proceeds to ask
what is historical explanation. In order to answer this question, he points out
that the characteristic of a biological explanation (as opposed, say, to a physical
one) is the occurrence of specifically biological terms in the explanatory
universal laws; and he concludes that an historical explanation would be one in
which specifically historical terms would so occur. He further finds that all laws
in which anything like specific historical terms occur are better characterized as
sociological, since the terms in question are of a sociological character rather
than of an historical one; and he is thus ultimately forced to identify ‘historical
explanation’ with ‘sociological explanation’.
It seems to me obvious that this view neglects what has been described here
in the text as the distinction between historical and generalizing sciences, and
their specific problems and methods; and I may say that discussions on the
problem of the method of history have long ago brought out the fact that history
is interested in specific events rather than in general laws. I have in mind, for
example, Lord Acton’s essays against Buckle, written in 1858 (to be found in
his Historical Essays and Studies, 1908), and the debate between Max Weber
and E. Meyer (see Weber’s Gesammelte Aufsätze am Wissenschaftslehre,
1922,pp. 215 ff.). Like Meyer, Weber always rightly emphasized that history is
interested in singular events, not in universal laws, and that, at the same time, it
is interested in causal explanation. Unfortunately, however, these correct views
led him to turn repeatedly (e.g. op. cit., p. 8) against the view that causality is
bound up with universal laws. It appears to me that our theory of historical
explanation, as developed in the text, removes the difficulty and at the same
time explains how it could arise.
8
The doctrine that crucial experiments may be made in physics has been
attacked by the conventionalists, especially by Duhem (cp. note 1 to this
chapter). But Duhem wrote before Einstein, and before Eddington’s crucial
eclipse observation; he even wrote before the experiments of Lummer and
Pringsheim which, by falsifying the formulae of Rayleigh and Jeans, led to the
Quantum theory.
9
The dependence of history upon our interest has been admitted both by E.
Meyer and by his critic M. Weber. Meyer writes (Zur Theorie und Methodik der
Geschichte, 1902, p. 37): ‘The selection of facts depends upon the historical
interest taken by those living at the present time, ..’ Weber writes (Ges. Aufsätze,
1922, p. 259): ‘Our .. interest .. will determine the range of cultural values which

determines .. history.” Weber, following Rickert, repeatedly insists that our
interest, in turn, depends upon ideas of value; in this he is certainly not wrong,
but he does not add anything to the methodological analysis. None of these
authors, however, draw the revolutionary consequence that, since all history
depends upon our interest, there can be only histories, and never a ‘history’, a
story of the development of mankind ‘as it happened’.—
For two interpretations of history which are opposed to one another, cp.
note 61 to chapter 11.
10
For this refusal to discuss the problem of the ‘meaning of meaning’
(Ogden and Richards) or rather of the ‘meanings of meaning’ (H. Gomperz), cp.
chapter 11, especially notes 26, 47, 50, and 51. See also note 25 to the present
chapter.
11
For moral futurism, cp. chapter 22.
12
Cp. K. Barth, Credo (1936), p. 12. For Earth’s remark against ‘the NeoProtestant doctrine of the revelation of God in history’, cp. op. cit., 142 See also
the Hegelian source of this doctrine, quoted in text to note 49, chapter 12. Cp.
also note 51 to chapter 24. For the next quotation cp. Barth op. cit.; 79.
* Concerning my remark that the story of Christ was not ‘the story of an
unsuccessful .. nationalist revolution’, I am now inclined to believe that it may
have been precisely this; see R. Eisler’s book Jesus Basileus. But in any case, it
is not a story of worldly success.*
13
Cp. Barth, op. cit., 76.
14
Cp. Kierkegaard’s Journal of 1854; see the German edition (1905) of his
Book of the Judge, p. 135.
15
Cp. note 57 to chapter 11, and text.
16
Cp. the concluding sentences of Macmurray’s The Clue to History (1938;
p. 237).
17
Cp. especially note 55 to chapter 24, and text.
18
Kierkegaard was educated at the University of Copenhagen in a period of
intense and even somewhat aggressive Hegelianism. The theologian Martensen
was especially influential. (For this aggressive attitude, cp. the judgement of the
Copenhagen Academy against Schopenhauer’s prize essay on the Foundations
of Morals, of 1840. It is very likely that this affair was instrumental in making
Kierkegaard acquainted with Schopenhauer, at a time when the latter was still
unknown in Germany.)
19
Cp. Kierkegaard’s Journal of 1853; see the German edition of his Book of
the Judge, p. 129, from which the passage in the text is freely translated.
Kierkegaard is not the only Christian thinker protesting against Hegel’s
historicism; we have seen (cp. note 12 to this chapter) that Barth also protests
against it. A remarkably interesting criticism of Hegel’s ideological
interpretation of history was given by the Christian philosopher, M. B. Foster, a
great admirer (if not a follower) of Hegel, at the end of his book The Political
Philosophies of Plato and Hegel. The main point of his criticism, if I understand
him rightly, is this. By interpreting history ideologically, Hegel does not see, in
its various stages, ends in themselves, but merely means for bringing about the
final end. But Hegel is wrong in assuming that historical phenomena or periods
are means to an end which can be conceived and stated as something
distinguishable from the phenomena themselves, in a way in which a purpose
can be distinguished from the action which seeks to realize it, or a moral from a
play (if we wrongly assume that the sole purpose of the play was to convey this

moral). For this assumption, Foster contends, shows a failure to recognize the
difference between the work of a creator and that of an instrument maker, a
technician or ‘Demiurge’.’.. a series of works of creation may be understood as a
development’, Foster writes (op. cit., pp. 201-3),’.. without a distinct conception
of the end to which they progress .. the painting, say, of one era may be
understood to have developed out of the era preceding it, without being
understood as a nearer approximation to a perfection or end ... Political history,
similarly, .. may be understood as development, without being interpreted as a
teleological process.—But Hegel, here and elsewhere, lacks insight in the
significance of creation.’ And later, Foster writes (op. cit., p. 204; italics partly
mine): ‘Hegel regards it as a sign of inadequacy of the religious imagery that
those who hold it, while they assert that there is a plan °f Providence, deny that
the plan is knowable ... To say that the plan of Providence is inscrutable is, no
doubt, an inadequate expression, but the truth which it expresses inadequately is
not that God’s plan is knowable, but that, as Creator and not as a Demiurge, God
does not work according to plan at all.’
I think that this criticism is excellent, even though the creation of a work °f
art may, in a very different sense, proceed according to a ‘plan’ (although not an
end or purpose); for it may be an attempt to realize something like the Platonic
idea of that work—that perfect model before his mental eyes or ears which the
painter or musician strives to copy. (Cp. note 9 to chapter 9 and notes 25-26 to
chapter 8.)
20
For Schopenhauer’s attacks upon Hegel, to which Kierkegaard refers, cp.
chapter 12, for example, text to note 13, and the concluding sentences. The
partly quoted continuation of Kierkegaard’s passage is op. cit., 130. (In a note,
Kierkegaard later inserted ‘pantheist’ before ‘putridity’.)
21
Cp. chapter 6, especially text to note 26.
22
For the Hegelian ethics of domination and submission, cp. note 25 to
chapter 11. For the ethics of hero-worship, cp. chapter 12, especially text to
notes 75 ff.
23
Cp. chapter 5 (especially text to note 5).
24
We can ‘express ourselves’ in many ways without communicating
anything. For our task of using language for the purpose of rational
communication, and for the need of keeping up the standards of clarity of the
language, cp. notes 19 and 20 to chapter 24 and note 30 to chapter 12.
25
This view of the problem of the ‘meaning of life’ may be contrasted with
Wittgenstein’s view of the problems of the ‘sense of life’ in the Tractatus (p.
187): ‘The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of this
problem.—(Is not this the reason why men to whom after long doubting the
sense of life became clear, could not then say wherein this sense consisted?)’
For Wittgenstein’s mysticism, see also note 32 to chapter 24. For the
interpretation of history here suggested, cp. notes 61 (1) to chapter 11, and 27 to
the present chapter.
26
Cp., for example, note 5 to chapter 5 and note 19 to chapter 24.
It may be remarked that the world of facts is in itself complete (since every
decision can be interpreted as a fact). It is therefore for ever impossible to refute
a monism which insists that there are only facts. But irrefutability is not a virtue.
Idealism, for example, cannot be refuted either.
27
It appears that one of the motives of historicism is that the historicist does
not see that there is a third alternative, besides the two which he allows: either

that the world is ruled by superior powers, by an ‘essential destiny’ or Hegelian
‘Reason’, or that it is a mere wheel of chance, irrational, on the level of a
gamble. But there is a third possibility: that we may introduce reason into it (cp.
note 19 to chapter 24); that although the world does not progress, we may
progress, individually as well as in co-operation.
This third possibility is clearly expressed by H. A. L. Fisher in his History
of Europe (vol. I, p. vii, italics mine; partly quoted in text to note 8 to chapter
21): ‘One intellectual excitement has .. been denied me. Men wiser and more
learned than I have discerned in history a plot, a rhythm, a predetermined
pattern. These harmonies are concealed from me. I can see only one emergency
following upon another as wave follows wave, only one great fact with respect
to which, since it is unique, there can be no generalizations, only one safe rule
for the historian: that he should recognize .. the play of the contingent and the
unforeseen.’ And immediately after this excellent attack upon historicism (with
the passage in italics, cp. note 13 to chapter 13), Fisher continues: ‘This is not a
doctrine of cynicism and despair. The fact of progress is written plain and large
on the page of history; but progress is not a law of nature. The ground gained
by one generation may be lost by the next.’
These last three sentences represent very clearly what I have called the
‘third possibility’, the belief in our responsibility, the belief that everything rests
with us. And it is interesting to see that Fisher’s statement is interpreted by
Toynbee (A Study of History, vol. V, 414) as representing ‘the modern Western
belief in the omnipotence of Chance’. Nothing could show more clearly the
attitude of the historicist, his inability to see the third possibility. And it explains
perhaps why he tries to escape from this alleged ‘omnipotence of chance’ into a
belief in the omnipotence of the power behind the historical scene—that is, into
historicism. (Cp. also note 61 to chapter 11.)
I may perhaps quote more fully Toynbee’s comments on Fisher’s passage
(which Toynbee quotes down to the words ‘the unforeseen’): ‘This brilliantly
phrased passage’, Toynbee writes, ‘cannot be dismissed as a scholar’s conceit;
for the writer is a Liberal who is formulating a creed which Liberalism has
translated from theory into action ... This modern Western belief in the
omnipotence of Chance gave birth in the nineteenth century of the Christian Era,
when things still seemed to be going well with Western Man, to the policy of
laissez faire ..’ (Why the belief in a progress for which we ourselves are
responsible should imply a belief in the omnipotence of Chance, or why it
should produce the policy of laissez faire, Toynbee leaves unexplained.)
28
By the ‘realism’ of the choice of our ends I mean that we should choose
ends which can be realized within a reasonable span of time, and that we should
avoid distant and vague Utopian ideals, unless they determine more immediate
aims which are worthy in themselves. Cp. especially the principles of piecemeal
social engineering, discussed in chapter 9.

The final manuscript of volume I of the first edition of this book
was completed in October, 1942, and that of volume II in
February, 1943.

Addenda to Volume I
I. Plato And Geometry (1957)
In the second edition of this book, I made a lengthy addition to
note 9 to chapter 6 (pp. 248 to 253). The historical hypothesis
propounded in this note was later amplified in my paper ‘The
Nature of Philosophical Problems and Their Roots in Science’
(British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 3, 1952, pp. 1241
ff.; now also in my Conjectures and Refutations). It may be
restated as follows: (1) the discovery of the irrationality of the
square root of two which led to the breakdown of the Pythagorean
programme of reducing geometry and cosmology (and presumably
all knowledge) to arithmetic, produced a crisis in Greek
mathematics; (2) Euclid’s Elements are not a textbook of
geometry, but rather the final attempt of the Platonic School to
resolve this crisis by reconstructing the whole of mathematics and
cosmology on a geometrical basis, in order to deal with the
problem of irrationality systematically rather than ad hoc, thus
inverting the Pythagorean programme of arithmetization; (3) it was
Plato who first conceived the programme later carried out by
Euclid: it was Plato who first recognized the need for a
reconstruction; who chose geometry as the new basis, and the
geometrical method of proportion as the new method; who drew up
the programme for a geometrization of mathematics, including
arithmetic, astronomy, and cosmology; and who became the
founder of the geometrical picture of the world, and thereby also
the founder of modern science—of the science of Copernicus,
Galileo, Kepler, and Newton.
I suggested that the famous inscription over the door of Plato’s
Academy (p. 248, (2), above) alluded to this programme of
geometrization. (That it was intended to announce an inversion of
the Pythagorean programme seems likely in view of Archytas,
fragment A, Diels-Kranz.)
In the middle of the last paragraph on p. 249 I suggested ‘that
Plato was one of the first to develop a specifically geometrical
method aiming at rescuing what could be rescued ... from the
breakdown of Pythagoreanism’; and I described this suggestion as
‘a highly uncertain historical hypothesis’. I no longer think that the
hypothesis is so very uncertain. On the contrary, I now feel that a
re-reading of Plato, Aristotle, Euclid, and Proclus, in the light of

this hypothesis, would produce as much corroborating evidence as
one could expect. In addition to the confirming evidence referred
to in the paragraph quoted, I now wish to add that already the
Gorgias (451a/b; c; 453e) takes the discussion of ‘odd’ and ‘even’
as characteristic of arithmetic, thereby clearly identifying
arithmetic with Pythagorean number theory, while characterizing
the geometer as the man who adopts the method of proportions
(465b/c). Moreover, in the passage from the Gorgias (508a) Plato
speaks not only of geometrical equality (cp. note 48 to chapter 8)
but he also states implicitly the principle which he was later to
develop fully in the Timaeus: that the cosmic order is a
geometrical order. Incidentally, the Gorgias also proves that the
word ‘alogos’ was not associated in Plato’s mind with irrational
numbers, since 465a says that even a technique, or art, must not be
alogos; which would hold a fortiori for a science such as
geometry. I think we may simply translate ‘alogos’ as’ alogical’.
(Cp. also Gorgias 496a/b; and 522e.) The point is important for the
interpretation of the title of Democritus’s lost book, mentioned
earlier on p. 249.
My paper on ‘The Nature of Philosophical Problems’ (see
above) contains some further suggestions concerning Plato’s
geometrization of arithmetic and of cosmology in general (his
inversion of the Pythagorean programme), and his theory of forms.
Added in 1961
Since this addendum was first published in 1957, in the third
edition of this book, I have found, almost by accident, some
interesting corroboration of the historical hypothesis formulated
above, in the first paragraph under (2). It is a passage in Proclus’
commentaries to the First Book of Euclid’s Elements (ed.
Friedlein, 1873, Prologus ii, p. 71, 2-5) from which it becomes
clear that there existed a tradition according to which Euclid’s
elements were a Platonic cosmology, a treatment of the problems
of the Timaeus.

II. The Dating Of The Theaetetus (1961)
There is a hint in note 50, (6), to chapter 8, p. 281, that ‘the
Theaetetus is perhaps (as against the usual assumption) earlier than
the Republic’. This suggestion was made to me by the late Dr.
Robert Eisler in a conversation not long before his death in 1949.
But since he did not tell me any more about his conjecture than

that it was partly based on Theaetetus 174e, f.—the crucial passage
whose post-Republican dating did not seem to me to fit into my
theory—I felt that there was not sufficient evidence for it, and that
it was too ad hoc to justify me in publicly saddling Eisler with the
responsibility for it.
However, I have since found quite a number of independent
arguments in favour of an earlier dating of the Theaetetus, and I
therefore wish now to acknowledge Eisler’s original suggestion.
Since Eva Sachs (cp. Socrates, 5, 1917, 531 f.) established that
the proem of the Theaetetus, as we know it, was written after 369,
the conjecture of a Socratic core and an early dating involves
another—that of an earlier lost edition, revised by Plato after
Theaetetus’ death. The latter conjecture was proposed
independently by various scholars, even before the discovery of a
papyrus (ed. by Diels, Berlin, Klassikerhefte, 2, 1905) that contains
part of a Commentary to the Theaetetus and refers to two distinct
editions. The following arguments seem to support both
conjectures.
(1) Certain passages in Aristotle seem to allude to the
Theaetetus: they fit the text of the Theaetetus perfectly, and they
claim, at the same time, that the ideas there expressed belong to
Socrates rather than to Plato. The passages I have in mind are the
ascription to Socrates of the invention of induction (Metaphysics
1078b17-33; cp. 987b1 and 1086b3) which, I think, is an allusion
to Socrates’ maieutic (developed at length in the Theaetetus), his
method of helping the pupil to perceive the true essence of a thing
through purging his mind of his false prejudices; and the further
ascription to Socrates of the attitude so strongly expressed again
and again in the Theaetetus: ‘Socrates used to ask questions and
not to answer them; for he used to confess that he did not know’
(Soph. El. 183b7). (These passages are discussed, in a different
context, in my lecture On the Sources of Knowledge and of
Ignorance, Proceedings of the British Academy, 46, 1960 (see
especially p. 50) which is also separately published by Oxford
University Press and is now included in my Conjectures and
Refutations.)
(2) The Theaetetus has a surprisingly inconclusive ending,
even though it turns out that it was so planned and prepared almost
from the beginning. (In fact, as an attempt to solve the problem of
knowledge which it ostensibly tries to do, this beautiful dialogue is

a complete failure.) But endings of a similarly inconclusive nature
are known to be characteristic of a number of early dialogues.
(3) ‘Know thyself is interpreted, as in the Apology, as ‘Know
how little you know’. In his final speech Socrates says ‘After this,
Theaetetus ... you will be less harsh and gentler to your associates,
for you will have the wisdom not to think that you know what you
do not know. So much my art [of maieutic] can accomplish; nor do
I know any of the things that are known by others ...’
(4) That ours is a second edition, revised by Plato, seems
likely, especially in view of the fact that the Introduction to the
dialogue (142a to the end of 143c) which might well have been
added as a memorial to a great man, actually contradicts a passage
which may have survived the revision of the earlier edition of this
dialogue; I mean its very end which, like a number of other early
dialogues, alludes to Socrates’ trial as imminent. The contradiction
consists in the fact that Euclid, who appears as a character in the
Introduction and who narrates how the dialogue came to be written
down, tells us (142c/d, 143a) that he went repeatedly to Athens
(from Megara, presumably), using every time the opportunity of
checking his notes with Socrates, and making ‘corrections’ here
and there. This is told in a way which makes it quite clear that the
dialogue itself must have taken place at least several months
before Socrates’ trial and death; but this is inconsistent with the
ending of the dialogue. (I have not seen any reference to this point,
but I cannot imagine that it has not been discussed by some
Platonist.) It may even be that the reference to ‘corrections’, in
143a, and also the much discussed description of the ‘new style’ in
143b-c (see for example C. Ritter’s Plato, vol. I, 1910, pp. 220 f.)
were introduced in order to explain some deviations of the revised
edition from the original edition. (This would make it possible to
place the revised edition even after the Sophist.)

III. Reply To A Critic (1961)
I have been asked to say something in reply to the critics of this
volume. But before doing so, I should like to thank again those
whose criticism has helped me to improve the book in various
ways.
Of the others—those I have come across—I feel reluctant to
say much. In attacking Plato I have, as I now realize, offended and
hurt many Platonists, and I am sorry for this. Still, I have been
surprised by the violence of some of the reactions.

I think most of the defenders of Plato have denied facts which,
it seems to me, cannot be seriously denied. This is true even of the
best of them: Professor Ronald B. Levinson in his monumental
book (645 closely printed pages) In Defense of Plato.
In trying to answer Professor Levinson I have before me two
tasks of very unequal importance. The less important task—
defending myself against a number of accusations—will be tackled
first (in section A), so that the more important task—replying to
Professor Levinson’s defence of Plato (in section B)—will not be
too much obscured by my personal defence.
A
The portrait of myself painted by Professor Levinson has
caused me to doubt the truth of my own portrait of Plato; for if it is
possible to derive from a living author’s book so distorted an
image of his doctrines and intentions, what hope can there be of
producing anything like a true portrait of an author born almost
twenty-four centuries ago?
Yet how can I defend myself against being identified with the
supposed original of the portrait painted by Professor Levinson?
All I can do is to show that some at least of the mistranslations,
misrepresentations, and distortions of Plato with which Professor
Levinson charges me are really non-existent. And even this I can
only do by analysing two or three representative samples, taken at
random from hundreds: there seem to be more such charges in the
book than there are pages. Thus all I can do is to prove that some at
least of the most violent accusations levelled against me are
baseless.
I should have liked to do this without raising any
counteraccusation of misquotation, etc.; but as this has turned out
to be impossible, I wish to make it quite clear that I now see that
Professor Levinson, like other Platonists, must have found my
book not only exasperating, but almost sacrilegious. And since I
am that man by whom the offence cometh, I must not complain if I
am bitterly denounced.
So let us examine a few of the relevant passages. Professor
Levinson writes (p. 273, note 72) of me: ‘As with others of whom
he disapproves, so here with Critias, Popper has further blackened
his character by exaggeration. For the verses cited represent
religion, though a fabrication, as being aimed at the general good

of society, not at the selfish benefit of the cunning fabricator
himself.’
Now if this means anything, it must mean that I have asserted,
or at least hinted, in the passages quoted by Professor Levinson
(that is, pp. 179 and 140 of A, which corresponds to pp. 183-184,
and pp. 142-143 of E[1]) that Critias’ verses which I have quoted
represent religion not only as a fabrication, but as a fabrication
‘aimed ... at the selfish benefit of the cunning fabricator himself.
I deny that I either asserted, or even hinted at, anything of the
kind. On the contrary, my concern has been to point out that the
‘general good of society’ is one of the dominant preoccupations of
Plato, and that his attitude in this respect ‘is practically identical
with that of Critias’. The basis of my criticism is clearly announced
at the beginning of chapter 8 (second paragraph) where I write:
‘“For the benefit of the city”, says Plato. Again we find that the
appeal to the principle of collective utility is the ultimate ethical
consideration.’
What I assert is that this moral principle which posits ‘the
general good of society’ as a moral aim, is not good enough as a
basis of ethics; for example, that it leads to lying—‘for the general
good of society’ or ‘for the benefit of the city’. In other words, I try
to show that ethical collectivism is mischievous, and that it
corrupts. But I nowhere interpret Critias’ quoted verses in the
sense alleged by Professor Levinson. I should be inclined to ask
‘Who blackens whose character by exaggeration?’, were it not for
the fact that I recognize that the severity of my attack was a
provocation which excuses Professor Levinson’s charges. But it
does not make them true.
A second example is this. Professor Levinson writes (pp. 354
f.): ‘One of Popper’s most extravagant assertions is that Plato had
viewed as a “favourable circumstance” the presence in Athens of
Spartan troops, summoned to assist the Thirty in maintaining
themselves and their iniquitous regime and had felt no other
emotion than approval at the thought of Athens beneath the
Spartan yoke; he would have been prepared, we are led to suppose,
to summon them again, if their presence could aid him in achieving
his neo-oligarchical revolution. There is no text which Popper can
cite in support of such a charge; it arises solely from his picture of
Plato as a third head upon the double-headed monster he has
created, called “the Old Oligarch and Critias”; it is guilt by
association, the very ultimate example of the witchhunt technique.’

To this my reply is: if this is one of my ‘most extravagant
assertions’, then I cannot have made any extravagant assertions.
For this assertion was never made by me; nor does it fit into the
picture which I have of Plato, and which I have tried—not wholly
successfully, it seems—to convey.
I do believe that Plato was led, by his distrust of the common
man, and by his ethical collectivism, to approve of violence; but I
simply never have made any assertion about Plato even faintly
similar to the one which Professor Levinson here asserts,
somewhat extravagantly, that I have made. There is therefore no
text which Professor Levinson can cite in support of his charge that
I have made this assertion: it arises solely from his picture of
Popper as a third head upon the double-headed monster of Otto
Neurath and J. A. Lauwerys which Professor Levinson has created;
and as to ‘guilt by association’, I can only refer to Professor
Levinson’s p. 441. There he is ‘helped towards answering this
question’—the question of ‘the predisposing cause that leads
Popper chronically to indulge these sinister imaginings’—by
associating me with ‘an older compatriot of Popper’s, the late
versatile Austrian philosopher and sociologist, Otto Neurath’. (In
fact neither Neurath nor I had any sympathy for the other’s
philosophy, as emerges only too clearly from Neurath’s and my
own writings; Neurath, for example, defended Hegel, and attacked
both Kantianism and my own praise of Kant. Of Neurath’s attack
on Plato I heard for the first time when I read about it in Professor
Levinson’s book; and I have not yet seen Neurath’s relevant
papers.)
But to return to my alleged ‘extravagant assertion’: what I
actually said (p. 195E = 196A) about Plato’s feelings is almost the
opposite of what Professor Levinson (p. 354) reports. I did not at
all suggest that Plato viewed as a ‘favourable circumstance’ the
presence in Athens of Spartan troops, or that he ‘felt no other
emotion than approval at the thought of Athens beneath the
Spartan yoke’. What I tried to convey, and what I said, was that the
Thirty Tyrants had failed ‘in spite of favourable circumstances in
the shape of powerful support from victorious Sparta’; and I
suggested that Plato saw the cause of their failure—just as I do—in
the moral failure of the Thirty. I wrote: ‘Plato felt that a complete
reconstruction of the programme was needed. The Thirty had been
beaten in the realm of power politics largely because they had

offended the citizens’ sense of justice. The defeat had been largely
a moral defeat.’
This is all I say here of Plato’s feelings. (I say twice ‘Plato
felt’.) I suggest that the failure of the Thirty induced a partial moral
conversion in Plato—though not a sufficiently far-reaching one.
There is no suggestion here of those feelings which Professor
Levinson makes me attribute to Plato; and I would never have
dreamt that anybody could read this into my text.
I certainly do attribute to Plato a measure of sympathy with the
Thirty Tyrants and especially with their pro-Spartan aims. But this
is of course something completely different from the ‘extravagant
assertions’ which Professor Levinson attributes to me. I can only
say that I did suggest that he admired his uncle Critias, the leader
of the Thirty. I did suggest that he was in sympathy with some of
Critias’ aims and views. But I also said that he considered the
oligarchy of the Thirty as a moral failure, and that this led him to
reconstruct his collectivist morality.
It will be seen that my answer to two of Professor Levinson’s
charges has taken up almost as much space as the charges
themselves. This is unavoidable; and I must therefore confine
myself to only two further examples (out of hundreds), both
connected with my alleged mistranslations of Plato’s text.
The first is Professor Levinson’s allegation that I worsen, or
exaggerate, Plato’s text. ‘Popper, however, as before, employs the
unfavourable word “deport” in his translation, in place of “send
out”,’ writes Professor Levinson on p. 349, note 244. But this is
simply a mistake—Professor Levinson’s mistake. If he looks at the
passage again, he will find that I employ the word ‘deport’ where
his translation—or rather Fowler’s—uses ‘banish’. (The part of the
passage in which Fowler’s translation uses ‘send out’ simply does
not occur in my quotation but is replaced by dots.)
As a consequence of this mistake, it turns out that, in this
context, Professor Levinson’s remark ‘as before’ is highly
appropriate. For before the passage just discussed he writes of me
(p. 348, note 243): ‘Popper reenforces his interpretation [p. 166E =
p. 162A] of the Platonic passage [Rep. 540e/541a] by slight
inaccuracies in the translation, tending to give the impression of
greater scorn or violence in Plato’s attitude. Thus he translates
“send away” (apopempō) as “expel and deport”...’ Now first of all,
there is another of Professor Levinson’s slips here (which makes
two in two consecutive footnotes); for Plato does not use here the

word ‘apopempō’, but the word ‘ekpempō’. This certainly does not
make much difference; yet ‘ekpempō’ has, at any rate, the ‘ex’ of
‘expel’; and one of its dictionary meanings is ‘to drive away’ and
another ‘to send away in disgrace’ (or ‘to send away with the
collateral notion of disgrace’ as my edition of Liddell and Scott has
it). The word is a somewhat stronger form of ‘pempō’—‘to send
off’, ‘to dispatch’—which, if used in connection with Hades (‘to
send to Hades’) ‘commonly means to send a living man to Hades,
i.e. to kill him’. (I am quoting Liddell and Scott. Nowadays some
people might even ‘commonly’ say ‘to dispatch him’. Closely
related is the meaning intended when Phaedrus tells us in Plato’s
Symposium 179e—a passage referred to by Professor Levinson on
p. 348—that the gods, redeeming and honouring Achilles for his
valour and his love of Patroclus, ‘sent him to the Islands of the
Blessed’—while Homer sent him to Hades.) It seems obvious that
neither of the translations ‘expel’ or ‘deport’ is open to criticism
here on scholarly grounds. Yet Professor Levinson is open to
criticism when he quotes me as writing ‘expel and deport’ for I do
not use the words in this way. (He would have been at least
technically correct had he quoted me ‘must be expelled ... and
deported’: the three dots make some difference here, for to write
‘expel and deport’ could be an attempt to exaggerate, by way of
‘re-enforcing’ the one expression with the other. Thus this slight
inaccuracy tends to re-enforce my alleged misdeed—my alleged
re-enforcing of my interpretation of this Platonic passage by slight
inaccuracies in my translation.)
But anyhow, this case amounts to nothing. For take the passage
in Shorey’s translation. (Shorey is, rightly, accepted as an authority
by Professor Levinson.) ‘All inhabitants above the age of ten’,
Shorey translates, ‘they [the ‘philosophers’ who have become
‘masters of the state’] will send out into the fields, and they will
take over the children, remove them from the manners and habits
of their parents, and bring them up in their own customs and laws
which will be such as we have described.’ Now does this not say
exactly what I said (though perhaps not quite as clearly as I did on
my p. 166E = 162A)? For who can believe that the ‘sending out’ of
‘all the inhabitants above the age of ten’ can be anything but a
violent expulsion and deportation? Would they just meekly go,
leaving their children behind, when ‘sent out’, if they were not
threatened, and compelled, by the ‘philosophers’ who have become
‘masters of the state’? (Professor Levinson’s suggestion, p. 349,

that they are sent to ‘their ... country estates, outside the city
proper’ is supported by him, ironically enough, with a reference to
the Symposium 179e and the ‘Islands of the Blessed’, the place to
which Achilles was sent by the gods—or more precisely by
Apollo’s or Paris’s arrow. Gorgias, 526c, would have been a more
appropriate reference.) In all this, there is an important principle
involved. I mean the principle that there is no such thing as a
literal translation; that all translations are interpretations; and that
we always have to take the context into account, and even parallel
passages.
That the passages with which (on p. 166E = p. 162A) I have
associated the one just quoted may indeed be so associated is
confirmed by Shorey’s own footnotes: he refers, especially, to the
passage which I have called the ‘canvas-cleaning’ passage, and to
the ‘kill-and-banish’ passage from the Statesman, 293c-e.
‘Whether they happen to rule by law or without law, over willing
or unwilling subjects;... and whether they purge the state for its
good, by killing or by deporting [or, as Professor Levinson
translates with Fowler, ‘by killing or banishing:; see above] some
of its citizens ... this form of government must be declared to be
the only one that is right.’ (See my text, p. 166E = p. 162A.)
Professor Levinson quotes (p. 349) part of this passage more
fully than I do. Yet he omits to quote that part which I quoted as its
commencement, ‘Whether they happen to rule by law or without
law, over willing or unwilling subjects’. The point is interesting,
because it fits Professor Levinson’s attempt to make the kill-andbanish passage appear in an almost innocent light. Immediately
after quoting the passage, Professor Levinson writes: ‘Fair
interpretation of this stated principle [I do not see any ‘principle’
here stated, unless it is that all is permitted if it is done for the
benefit of the state] requires at least a brief indication of the
general pattern of the dialogue.’ In the course of this ‘brief
indication’ of Plato’s aims and tendencies, we hear—without a
direct quotation from Plato—that ‘Other traditional and currently
accepted criteria, such as whether rule be exercised ... over willing
or unwilling subjects, or in accord or not in accord with law, are
rejected as irrelevant or non-essential’. The words from Professor
Levinson’s passage which I have here italicized will be seen to be
a near-quotation of the commencement (not quoted by Professor
Levinson) of my own quotation from Plato’s kill-and-banish
passage. Yet this commencement appears now in a very harmless

light: no longer are the rulers told to kill and banish ‘with or
without law’, as I indicated; and Professor Levinson’s readers get
the impression that this question is here merely dismissed as a side
issue—as ‘irrelevant’ to the problem in hand.
But Plato’s readers, and even the participants in his dialogue,
get a different impression. Even the ‘Younger Socrates’, who
intervened just before (after the commencement of the passage as
quoted by me) with the one exclamation ‘Excellent!’ is shocked by
the lawlessness of the proposed killing; for immediately after the
enunciation of the kill-and-banish principle (perhaps it really is a
‘principle’, after all) he says, in Fowler’s translation (the italics are
of course mine): ‘Everything else that you have said seems
reasonable; but that government [and such hard measures, too, it is
implied] should be carried out without laws is a hard saying.’
I think that this remark proves that the commencement of my
quotation—‘by law or without law’—is really meant by Plato to be
part of his kill-and-banish principle; that I was right in
commencing the quotation where I did; and that Professor
Levinson is simply mistaken when he suggests that ‘with or
without law’ is here merely intended to mean that this is a question
which is here ‘rejected as irrelevant’ to the essence of the problem
in hand.
In interpreting the kill-and-banish passage, Professor Levinson
is clearly deeply disturbed; yet at the end of his elaborate attempt
to defend Plato by comparing his practices with our own he arrives
at the following view of the passage: ‘Looked at in this context,
Plato’s statesman, with his apparent readiness to kill, banish, and
enslave, where we should prescribe either the penitentiary, at one
end, or psychiatric social service, at the other, loses much of his
sanguinary coloration.’
Now I do not doubt that Professor Levinson is a genuine
humanitarian—a democrat and a liberal. But is it not perturbing to
see that a genuine humanitarian, in his eagerness to defend Plato,
can be led to compare in this fashion our admittedly very faulty
penal practices and our no less faulty social services with the
avowedly lawless killing and banishing (and enslaving) of citizens
by the ‘true statesman’—a good and wise man—‘for the benefit of
the city’? Is this not a frightening example of the spell which Plato
casts over many of his readers, and of the danger of Platonism?
There is too much of this—all mixed with accusations against a
largely imaginary Popper—for me to deal with. But I wish to say

that I regard Professor Levinson’s book not only as a very sincere
attempt to defend Plato, but also as an attempt to see Plato in a new
light. And though I have found only one passage—and quite an
unimportant one—which has led me to think that, in this place, I
interpreted Plato’s text (though not his meaning) somewhat too
freely, I do not wish to create the impression that Professor
Levinson’s is not a very good and interesting book—especially if
we forget all about the scores of places where ‘Popper’ is quoted,
or (as I have shown) slightly misquoted, and very often radically
misunderstood.
But more important than these personal questions is the
question: how far does Professor Levinson’s defence of Plato
succeed?
B
I have learnt that when faced with a new attack on my book by
a defender of Plato it is best to disregard the smaller points and to
look for answers to the following five cardinal points.
(1) How is my assertion met that the Republic and the Laws
condemn the Socrates of the Apology (as pointed out in chapter 10,
second paragraph of section vi)? As explained in a note (note 55 to
chapter 10) the assertion was in effect made by Grote, and
supported by Taylor. If it is fair—and I think it is—then it supports
also my assertion mentioned in my next point, (2).
(2) How is my assertion met that Plato’s anti-liberal and antihumanitarian attitude cannot possibly be explained by the alleged
fact that better ideas were not known to him, or that he was, for
those days, comparatively liberal and humanitarian?
(3) How is my assertion met that Plato (for example in the
canvas-cleaning passage of the Republic and in the kill-and-banish
passage of the Statesman] encouraged his rulers to use ruthless
violence ‘for the benefit of the state’?
(4) How is my assertion met that Plato established for his
philosopher kings the duty and privilege of using lies and deceit
for the benefit of the city, especially in connection with racial
breeding, and that he was one of the founding fathers of racialism?
(5) What is said in answer to my quotation of the passage from
the Laws used as a motto for The Spell of Plato on p. 7 (and, as
announced at the beginning of the Notes on p. 203, ‘discussed in
some detail in notes 33 and 34 to chapter 6’)?

I often tell my students that what I say about Plato is—
necessarily—merely an interpretation, and that I should not be
surprised if Plato (should I ever meet his shade) were to tell me,
and to establish to my satisfaction, that it is a misrepresentation;
but I usually add that he would have quite a task to explain away a
number of the things he had said.
Has Professor Levinson succeeded on Plato’s behalf in this
task, regarding any of the five points mentioned above?
I really do not think he has.
(1′) As to the first point, I ask anybody in doubt to read
carefully the text of the last speech made by the Athenian Stranger
in book X of the Laws (907d down to, say, 909d). The legislation
there discussed is concerned with the type of crime of which
Socrates was accused. My contention is that, while Socrates had a
way out (most critics think, in view of the evidence of the Apology,
that he would probably have escaped death had he been willing to
accept banishment), Plato’s Laws do not make any such provision.
I shall quote from a passage in Bury’s translation (which seems to
be acceptable to Levinson) of this very long speech. After
classifying his ‘criminals’ (that is, those guilty of ‘impiety’ or ‘the
disease of atheism’: the translation is Bury’s; cp. 908c), the
Athenian Stranger discusses first ‘those who, though they utterly
disbelieve the existence of gods, possess by nature a just character
.. and ... are incapable of being induced to commit unjust actions’.
(908b-c; this is almost a portrait—of course an unconscious one—
of Socrates, apart from the important fact that he does not seem to
have been an atheist, though accused of impiety and unorthodoxy.)
About these Plato says:
‘... those criminals ... being devoid of evil disposition and
character, shall be placed by the judge according to law in the
reformatory for a period of not less than five years, during which
time no other of the citizens shall hold intercourse with them save
only those who take part in the nocturnal assembly, and they shall
company with them [I should translate ‘they shall attend to them’]
to minister to their soul’s salvation by admonition ...’ Thus the
‘good’ among the impious men get a minimum of five years of
solitary confinement, only relieved by ‘attention’ to their sick souls
from the members of the Nocturnal Council. ‘... and when the
period of their incarceration has expired, if any of them seems to
be reformed, he shall dwell with those who are reformed, but if

not, and if he be convicted again on a like charge, he shall be
punished by death.’ I have nothing to add to this.
(2′) The second point is perhaps the most important from
Professor Levinson’s point of view: it is one of his main claims
that I am mistaken in my assertion that there were humanitarians—
better ones than Plato—among those whom I have called the
‘Great Generation’.
He asserts, in particular, that my picture of Socrates as a man
very different from Plato in this respect is quite fictitious.
Now I have devoted a very long footnote (note 56 to chapter
10), in fact quite an essay, to this problem—the Socratic Problem;
and I do not sec any reason to change my views on it. But I wish to
say here that I have received support in this historical conjecture of
mine about the Socratic Problem, from a Platonic scholar of the
eminence of Richard Robinson; support which is the more
significant as Robinson castigates me severely (and perhaps justly)
for the tone of my attack on Plato. Nobody who reads his review of
my book (Philosophical Review, 60, 1951) can accuse him of
undue partiality for me; and Professor Levinson quotes him
approvingly (p. 20) for speaking of my ‘rage to blame’ Plato. But
although Professor Levinson (in a footnote on p. 20) refers to
Richard Robinson as ‘mingling praise and blame in his extensive
review of the Open Society’, and although (in another footnote, on
p. 61) he rightly refers to Robinson as an authority about ‘the
growth of Plato’s logic from its Socratic beginnings through its
middle period’, Professor Levinson never tells his readers that
Robinson agrees not only with my main accusations against Plato,
but also, more especially, with my conjectural solution of the
Socratic Problem. (Incidentally, Robinson also agrees that my
quotation mentioned here in point (5) is correct; see below.) Since
Robinson, as we have heard, ‘mingles praise and in blame’, some
of his readers (anxious to find confirmation for their ‘rage to
blame’ me) may have overlooked the praise contained in the
surprising last sentence of the following forceful passage from his
review (p. 494):
‘Dr. Popper holds that Plato perverted the teaching of Socrates
... To him Plato is a very harmful force in politics but Socrates a
very beneficial one. Socrates died for the right to talk freely to the
young; but in the Republic Plato makes him take up an attitude of
condescension and distrust towards them. Socrates died for truth
and free speech; but in the Republic “Socrates” advocates lying.

Socrates was intellectually modest; but in the Republic he is a
dogmatist. Socrates was an individualist; but in the Republic he is a
radical collectivism And so on.
‘What is Dr. Popper’s evidence for the views of the real
Socrates? It is drawn exclusively from Plato himself, from the
early dialogues, and primarily from the Apology. Thus the angel of
light with whom he contrasts the demon Plato is known to us only
from the demon’s own account! Is this absurd? It is not absurd, in
my opinion, but entirely correct.’
This passage shows that at least one scholar, admitted by
Professor Levinson to be an authority on Plato, has found that my
view on the Socratic Problem is not absurd.
But even if my conjectural solution of the Socratic Problem
should be mistaken, there is plenty of evidence left for the
existence of humanitarian tendencies in this period.
Concerning the speech of Hippias, to be found in Plato’s
Protagoras, 337e (see above p. 70; Professor Levinson seems for
once not to object to my translation; see his p. 144), Professor
Levinson writes (p. 147): ‘We must begin by assuming that Plato is
here reflecting faithfully a well-known sentiment of Hippias.’ So
far Professor Levinson and I agree. But we disagree completely
about the relevance of Hippias’ speech. On this I have now even
stronger views than those I expressed in the text of this volume.
(Incidentally, I don’t think I ever asserted that there was evidence
that Hippias was an opponent of slavery; what I said of him was
that ‘this spirit was bound up with the Athenian movement against
slavery’; thus Professor Levinson’s elaborate argument that I am
not justified ‘in including him [Hippias] among the opponents of
slavery’ is pointless.)
I now see Hippias’ speech as a manifesto—the first perhaps—
of a humanitarian faith which inspired the ideas of the
Enlightenment and the French Revolution: that all men are
brothers, and that it is conventional, man-made, law and custom
which divide them and which are the source of much avoidable
unhappiness; so that it is not impossible for men to make things
better by a change in the laws—by legal reform. These ideas also
inspired Kant. And Schiller speaks of conventional law as ‘the
fashion’ which sternly (‘streng’)—Beethoven says ‘insolently’
(‘frech’)—divides mankind.
As to slavery, my main contention is that the Republic contains
evidence of the existence of tendencies in Athens which may be

described as opposition to slavery. Thus the ‘Socrates’ of the
Republic (563b says, in a speech satirizing Athenian democracy (I
quoted it in chapter 4, ii, p. 43E = p. 44A; but I am here using
Shorey’s translation): ‘And the climax of popular liberty ... is
attained in such a city when the purchased slaves, male and female,
are no less free than the owners who paid for them.’
Shorey has a number of cross-references to this passage (see
footnote below); but the passage speaks for itself. Levinson says of
this passage elsewhere (p. 176): ‘Let us contribute the just-quoted
passage to help fill the modest inventory of Plato’s social sins’, and
on the next page he refers to it when he speaks of ‘Another
instance of Platonic hauteur’. But this is no answer to my
contention that, taken together with a second passage from the
Republic quoted in my text (p. 43E = p. 44A), this first passage
supplies evidence of an anti-slavery movement. The second
passage (which follows in Plato immediately after an elaboration
of the first, here quoted at the end of the preceding paragraph)
reads in Shorey’s translation (Republic 563d; the previous passage
was Republic 563b): ‘And do you know that the sum total of all
these items ... is that they render the souls of the citizens so
sensitive that they chafe at the slightest suggestion of servitude [I
translated ‘slavery’] and will not endure it?’
How does Professor Levinson deal with this evidence? First, by
separating the two passages: the first he does not discuss until p.
176, long after he has smashed to bits (on p. 153) my alleged
evidence concerning an anti-slavery movement. The second he
dismisses on p. 153 as a grotesque mistranslation of mine; for he
writes there: ‘Yet it is all a mistake; though Plato uses the word
douleia (slavery or servitude), it bears only a figurative allusion
[my italics] to slavery in the usual sense.’
This may sound plausible when the passage is divorced from
its immediate predecessor (only mentioned by Professor Levinson
in more than twenty pages later, where he explains it by Plato’s
hauteur); but in its context—in connection with Plato’s complaint
about the licentious behaviour of slaves (and even of animals)—
there can be no doubt whatever that, in addition to the meaning
which Professor Levinson correctly ascribes to the passage, the
passage also bears a second meaning which takes ‘douleia’ quite
literally; for it says, and it means, that the free democratic citizens
cannot stand slavery in any form—not only do they not submit
themselves to any suggestion of servitude (not even to laws, as

Plato goes on to say), but they have become so tenderhearted that
they cannot bear ‘even the slightest suggestion of servitude’—such
as the slavery of ‘purchased slaves, male or female’.
Professor Levinson (p. 153, after discussing Plato’s second
passage) asks: ‘in the light of the evidence ... what, then, can fairly
be said to remain standing in Popper’s case ...? The simplest
answer is “Nothing,” if words are taken in anything like their
literal sense.’ Yet his own case rests upon taking ‘douleia’, in a
context which clearly refers to slavery, not in its literal sense but as
‘only a figurative allusion’, as he himself has put it a few lines
earlier.[2]
And yet, he says of the grotesque ‘mistake’ I made in
translating ‘douleia’ literally: ‘This misreading has borne fruit in
the preface to Sherwood Anderson’s play Barefoot in Athens ...
where the unsuspecting playwright, following Popper’ (Professor
Levinson asserts on p. 24 that ‘the Andersonian version of Plato
plainly bespeaks a close and docile reading of Popper’, but he
gives no evidence for this strange accusation) ‘passes on to his
readers in turn the allusion, and declares flatly ... as on Plato’s own
authority, that the Athenians ... “advocate[d] the manumission of
all slaves”...’
Now this remark of Maxwell (not Sherwood) Anderson’s may
well be an exaggeration. But where have I said anything similar to
this? And what is the worth of a case if, in its defence, the defender
has to exaggerate the views of his opponent, or blacken them by
associating them with the (alleged) guilt of some ‘docile’ reader?
(See also the Index to this volume, under ‘Slavery’.)
(3′) My contention that Plato encouraged his rulers to use
ruthless and lawless violence, though it is combatted by Professor
Levinson, is nowhere really denied by him, as will be seen from
his discussion of the ‘kill-and-banish’ passage of the Statesman
mentioned in this Addendum towards the end of section A. All he
denies is that a number of other passages in the Republic—the
canvas-cleaning passages—are similar, as both Shorey and I think.
Apart from this, he tries to derive comfort and moral support from
some of our modern violent practices—a comfort which, I fear,
will be diminished if he re-reads the passage of the Statesman
together with its commencement, quoted by me, but first omitted
by Professor Levinson, and later dismissed as irrelevant.
(4′) As to Plato’s racialism, and his injunction to his rulers to
use lies and deceit for the benefit of the state, I wish to remind my

readers, before entering into any discussion with Professor
Levinson, of Kant’s saying (see p. 139E = p. 137A) that though
‘truthfulness is the best policy’ might be questionable, ‘truthfulness
is better than policy’ is beyond dispute.
Professor Levinson writes (p. 434, referring to my pp. 138 ff. E
= pp. 136 ff. A, and especially to pp. 150E = pp. 148A) very fairly:
‘First of all, we must agree that the use of lies in certain
circumstances is advocated [my italics] in the Republic for
purposes of government ...’ This, after all, is my main point. No
attempt to play it down or to diminish its significance—and no
counter-attack on my alleged exaggerations—should be allowed to
obscure this admission.
Professor Levinson also admits, in the same place, that ‘there
can be no doubt that some use of the persuasive art of speech
would be required to make the auxiliaries “blame chance and not
the rulers” when they are told [see my p. 150E = p. 148A] that the
fall of the lot has determined their marriages, whereas really these
are engineered by the rulers for eugenic reasons’.
This was my second main point.
Professor Levinson continues (pp. 434 f.; my italics): ‘In this
instance we have the only sanctioning by Plato of an outright
practical lie,[3] to be told, to be sure, for benevolent reasons (and
only for such purposes does Plato sanction the telling), but a lie
and nothing more. We, like Popper, find this policy distasteful.
This lie, then, and any others like it which Plato’s rather general
permission might justify, constitute such basis as exists for
Popper’s charge that Plato proposes to use “lying propaganda” in
his city.’
Is this not enough? Let us assume that I was wrong in my other
points (which, of course, I deny), does not all this at least excuse
my suspicion that Plato would not have scrupled to make some
further use of his ‘rather general permission’ of ‘the the use of
lies’—especially in view of the fact that he actually ‘advocated’
the ‘use of lies’ as Professor Levinson has it?
Moreover, the lying is here used in connection with ‘eugenics’,
or more precisely, with the breeding of the master race—the race
of the guardians.
In defending Plato against my accusation that he was a racialist
Professor Levinson tries to compare him favourably with some
‘notorious’ modern totalitarian racialists whose names I have tried
to keep out of my book. (And I shall continue to do so.) He says of

these (p. 541; my italics) that their ‘breeding schedule’ ‘was
primarily intended to preserve the purity of the master race, an aim
which we have been at some pains to show Plato did not share.’
Did he not? Was my quotation from one of the main eugenic
discussions of the Republic (460c) perhaps a mistranslation? I
wrote (pp. 51E = p. 52A); I am here introducing new italics):
‘“The race of the guardians must be kept pure”, says Plato (in
defence of infanticide) when developing the racialist argument that
we breed animals with great care while neglecting our own race, an
argument which has been repeated ever since.’
Is my translation wrong? Or my assertion that this has been,
ever since Plato, the main argument of racialists and breeders of
the master race? Or are the guardians not the masters of Plato’s
best city?
As to my translation, Shorey puts it a little differently; I shall
quote from his translation (the italics are mine) also the preceding
sentence (referring to infanticide): ‘... the offspring of the inferior,
and any of those of the other sort who are born defective, they [the
rulers] will properly dispose of in secret, so that no one will know
what has become of them. “That is the condition,” he said, “of
preserving the purity of the guardian’s breed.”’
It will be seen that Shorey’s last sentence is slightly weaker
than mine. But the difference is trifling, and does not affect my
thesis. And at any rate, I stick to my translation. ‘At all events the
breed of the guardians must be preserved pure’ or ‘If at all events
[as we agree] the purity of the breed of the guardians must be
preserved’ would be a translation which, using some of Shorey’s
words, brings out precisely the same meaning as my translation in
the body of the book (pp. 51E = p. 52A) and here repeated.
I cannot see, therefore, what the difference is between
Professor Levinson’s formulation of that ‘notorious ... breeding
schedule’ of the totalitarians, and Plato’s formulation of his own
breeding aims. Whatever minor difference there may be is
irrelevant to the central question.
As to the problem whether Plato allowed—very
exceptionally—a mingling of his races (which would be the
consequence of promoting a member of the lower race), opinions
may differ. I still believe that what I said is true. But I cannot see
that it would make any difference if exceptions were permitted.
(Even those modern totalitarians to whom Professor Levinson
alludes permitted exceptions.)

(5′) I have been repeatedly and severely attacked for quoting—
or rather misquoting—a passage from the Laws which I have taken
as one of the two mottos of The Spell of Plato (the other and
contrasting passage is from Pericles’ funeral oration). These
mottos were printed by my American publishers on the jacket of
the American edition; the English editions have no such
advertisement. As is usual with jackets, I was not consulted by the
publishers about them. (But I certainly have no objection to my
American publishers’ choice: why should they not print my
mottos—or anything else I wrote in the book—on their jackets?)
My translation and interpretation of this passage has been
pronounced to be correct by Richard Robinson, as mentioned
above; but others went so far as to ask me whether I had not
consciously tried to hide its identity, in order to make it impossible
for my readers to check the text! And this although I have taken
more trouble, I think, than most authors to make it possible for my
readers to check any passage quoted or referred to. Thus I have a
reference to my mottos at the beginning of my notes—although it
is somewhat unusual to make references to one’s mottos.
The main accusation against me for using this passage is that I
do not say, or do not emphasize sufficiently, that it refers to
military matters. But here I have testimony in my favour from
Professor Levinson himself who writes (p. 531, footnote; my
italics): ‘Popper, in citing this passage in his text, p. 102 [= p.
103E] duly emphasizes its reference to military matters.’
Thus this charge is answered. However, Professor Levinson
continues: ‘... but [Popper] protests simultaneously that Plato
means the same “militarist principles” to be adhered to in peace as
well as in war, and that they are to be applied to every area of
peaceful existence rather than simply to the program of military
training. He then quotes the passage with perverse mistranslations
which tend to obscure its military reference ...’ and so on.
Now the first charge here is that I ‘protest simultaneously’ that
Plato means these militarist principles to be adhered to in peace as
well as in war. Indeed I have said so—quoting Plato: it is Plato
who says so. Should I have suppressed it? Plato says, in Bury’s
translation of which Professor Levinson approves (though I prefer
mine: I ask my readers whether there is any difference of meaning
between them, as distinct from one of clarity; see p. 103E = p.
102A): ‘... nor should anyone, whether at work or in play, grow
habituated in mind to acting alone and on his own initiative, but he

should live always both in war and peace, with his eyes fixed
constantly on his commander ...’ (Laws, Loeb Library, vol. ii, p.
477; my italics).
And later (p. 479): ‘This task of ruling, and of being ruled by,
others must be practised in peace from earliest childhood ...’
As to mistranslation, I can only say that there is practically no
difference between my translation and Bury’s—except that I have
broken up Plato’s two very long sentences which, as they stand,
are not quite easy to follow. Professor Levinson says (p. 531) that I
have ‘made great and illegitimate use’ of this passage; and he
continues: ‘His journalistic misapplication of a selection from it on
the dust cover’ [the publishers’ advertisement; see above] ‘and on
the title page of Part I of his book will be dissected in our note,
where we also print the passage in full.’
The dissection of my ‘journalistic misapplication’ in this note
consists, apart from some alleged ‘corrections’ of my translation
which I do not accept, mainly of the same charge—that I have
printed the passage on the jacket and in other important places. For
Professor Levinson writes (p. 532; italics mine):
‘This small unfairness is entirely eclipsed, however, by what
Popper has done with the passage elsewhere. On the title page of
Part I of his book, and also on the dust jacket’ [who is unfair to
whom?] ‘he prints a carefully chosen selection from it, and beside
it prints, as its very antithesis, a sentence drawn from Pericles’
funeral oration .... This is to print in parallel a political ideal and a
proposed military regulation; yet Popper has not only failed to
apprise the reader of this selection of its military reference, but
employing the same mistranslations, has deleted absolutely all
those parts of the passage which would reveal the fact.’ *
My answer to this is very simple, (a) The mistranslations are
non-existent, (b) I have tried to show at length that the passage, in
spite of its military reference, formulates, like the Pericles passage
(which incidentally also has some, though less, military reference),
a political ideal—that is, Plato’s political ideal.
I have seen no valid reason to change my belief that I am right
in holding that this passage—like so many similar passages in the
Laws—formulates Plato’s political ideal. But whether this belief of
mine is true or not, I have certainly given strong reasons for it
(reasons which Professor Levinson fails to undermine). And since I
have done so, and since Professor Levinson does not at all question
the fact that I believe that I have done so, it constitutes neither a

‘small unfairness’ nor a great one if I try to present the passage as
what I believe it to be: Plato’s own description of his political
ideal—of his totalitarian and militaristic ideal state.
As to my mistranslations, I shall confine myself to the one
which Professor Levinson finds important enough to discuss in his
text (as distinct from his footnote). He writes, on p. 533:
‘A further objection concerns Popper’s use of the word
“leader.” Plato uses “archon”, the same word he employs for
officials of the state and for military commanders; it is clearly the
latter, or the directors of the athletic contests, whom he has herein
mind.’
Clearly, there is no case for me to answer. (Should I have
perhaps translated ‘director’?) Anybody who consults a Greek
dictionary can ascertain that ‘archon’, in its most basic meaning, is
properly and precisely rendered by the English word ‘leader’ (or
the Latin ‘dux’ or the Italian ‘il duce’). The word is described, by
Liddell and Scott, as a participle of the verb ‘archo’ whose
fundamental meaning, according to these authorities, is ‘to be
first’, either ‘in point of Time’, or ‘in point of Place or Station’. In
this second sense the first meanings given are: ‘to lead, rule,
govern, command, be leader or commander’. Accordingly we find,
under archon, ‘a ruler, commander, captain; also, with respect to
Athens, the chief magistrates at Athens, nine in number.’ This
should suffice to show that ‘leader’ is not a mistranslation,
provided it fits the text. That it does can be seen from Bury’s own
version in which, it will be remembered, the passage is rendered as
follows: ‘but he should live always, both in war and peace, with his
eyes fixed constantly on his commander and following his lead’. In
fact, ‘leader’ fits the text only too well: it is the horrifying
fittingness of the word which has produced Professor Levinson’s
protest. Since he is unable to see Plato as an advocate of
totalitarian leadership, he feels that it must be my ‘perverse
mistranslations’ (p. 531) which are to be blamed for the horrifying
associations which this passage evokes.
But I assert that it is Plato’s text, and Plato’s thought, which is
horrifying. I am, as is Professor Levinson, shocked by the ‘leader’,
and all that this term connotes. Yet these connotations must not be
played down if we wish to understand the appalling implications of
the Platonic ideal state. These I set out to bring home, as well as I
could.

It is perfectly true that in my comments I have stressed the fact
that, although the passage refers to military expeditions, Plato
leaves no doubt that its principles are to apply to the whole life of
his soldier-citizens. It is no answer to say that a Greek citizen was,
and had to be, a soldier; for this is true of Pericles and the time of
his funeral oration (for soldiers fallen in battle) at least as much as
of Plato and the time of his Laws.
This is the point which my mottos were meant to bring out as
clearly as possible. This made it necessary to cut out one clause
from this unwieldy passage, thereby omitting (as indicated by the
insertion of dots) some of those references to military matters
which would have obscured my main point: I mean the fact that the
passage has a general application, to war and to peace, and that
many Platonists have misread it, and missed its point, because of
its length and obscure formulation, and because of their anxiety to
idealize Plato. This is how the case stands. Yet I am accused in this
context by Professor Levinson (p. 532) of using ‘tactics’ which
‘make it necessary to check in merciless detail every one of
Popper’s citations from the Platonic text’, in order to ‘reveal how
far from the path of objectivity and fairness Popper has been
swept’. Faced with these accusations and allegations, and with
suspicions cast upon me, I can only try to defend myself. But I am
conscious of the principle that no man ought to be judge in his own
cause. It is for this reason that I wish here to quote what Richard
Robinson says (on p. 491 of The Philosophical Review, 60) about
this Platonic passage, and about my translation of it. It should be
remembered that Robinson is ‘mingling praise with blame’ in his
review of my book, and that part of the blame consists in the
assertion that my translations of Plato are biased. Yet he writes:
‘Biased though they are, they should certainly not be
disregarded. They draw attention to real and important features of
Plato’s thought that are usually overlooked. In particular, Dr.
Popper’s show piece, the horrible passage from Laws 942 about
never acting on one’s own, is correctly translated. (It might be
urged that Plato intended this to apply only to the military life of
his citizens, and it is true that the passage begins as a prescription
for army discipline; but by the end Plato is clearly wishing to
extend it to all life; cf. “the anarchy must be removed from all the
life of all the men” [Laws, 942d 1].).
I feel that I should add nothing to Robinson’s statement.

To sum up. I cannot possibly attempt to answer even a fraction
of the charges Professor Levinson has brought against me. I have
tried to answer only a few of them, bearing in mind, as well as I
could, that more important than the problem of who is unfair to
whom is the question whether or not my assertions about Plato
have been refuted. I have tried to give reasons for my belief that
they have not been refuted. But I repeat that no man ought to be
judge in his own cause: I must leave it to my readers to decide.
Yet I do not wish to end this long discussion without
reaffirming my conviction of Plato’s overwhelming intellectual
achievement. My opinion that he was the greatest of all
philosophers has not changed. Even his moral and political
philosophy is, as an intellectual achievement, without parallel,
though I find it morally repulsive, and indeed horrifying. As to his
physical cosmology, I have changed my mind between the first and
second edition (more precisely, between the first English edition
and the first American edition) of this book; and I have tried to
give reasons why I now think that he is the founder of the
geometrical theory of the world; a theory whose importance has
continuously increased down the ages. His literary powers I should
think it presumptuous to praise. What my critics have shown is, I
believe, that Plato’s greatness makes it all the more important to
fight his moral and political philosophy, and to warn those who
may fall under his magic spell.

IV. (1965)
In note 31 to Chapter 3 I mentioned a number of works which
seemed to me to anticipate my views of Plato’s politics. Since
writing this note I have read Diana Spearman’s great attack, of
1939, on appeasers and dictators, Modern Dictatorship. Her
chapter, ‘The Theory of Autocracy’, contains one of the deepest
and most penetrating, and at the same time one of the briefest
analyses of Plato’s political theory that I have seen.

Addenda to Volume II
I. Facts, Standards, And Truth: A Further Criticism
Of Relativism (1961)
The main philosophical malady of our time is an intellectual
and moral relativism, the latter being at least in part based upon the

former. By relativism—or, if you like, scepticism—I mean here,
briefly, the theory that the choice between competing theories is
arbitrary; since either, there is no such thing as objective truth; or,
if there is, no such thing as a theory which is true or at any rate
(though perhaps not true) nearer to the truth than another theory;
or, if there are two or more theories, no ways or means of deciding
whether one of them is better than another.
In this addendum 1 I shall first suggest that a dose of Tarski’s
theory of truth (see also the references to A. Tarski in the Index of
this book), stiffened perhaps by my own theory of getting nearer to
the truth, may go a long way towards curing this malady, though I
admit that some other remedies might also be required, such as the
non-authoritarian theory of knowledge which I have developed
elsewhere.2 I shall also try to show (in sections 12 ff. below) that
the situation in the realm of standards—especially in the moral and
political field—is somewhat analogous to that obtaining in the
realm of facts.
1. Truth
Certain arguments in support of relativism arise from the
question, asked in the tone of the assured sceptic who knows for
certain that there is no answer: ‘What is truth?’ But Pilate’s
question can be answered in a simple and reasonable way—though
hardly in a way that would have satisfied him—as follows: an
assertion, proposition, statement, or belief, is true if, and only if, it
corresponds to the facts.
Yet what do we mean by saying that a statement corresponds to
the facts? Though to our sceptic or relativist this second question
may seem just as unanswerable as the first, it actually can be
equally readily answered. The answer is not difficult—as one
might expect if one reflects upon the fact that every judge assumes
that the witness knows what truth (in the sense of correspondence
with the facts) means. Indeed, the answer turns out to be almost
trivial.
In a way it is trivial—that is, once we have learnt from Tarski
that the problem is one in which we refer to or speak about
statements and facts and some relationship of correspondence
holding between statement and facts; and that, therefore, the
solution must also be one that refers to or speaks about statements
and facts, and some relation between them. Consider the
following:

The statement ‘Smith entered the pawnshop shortly after 10.15’
corresponds to the facts if, and only if, Smith entered the pawnshop
shortly after 10.15.
When we read this italicized paragraph, what is likely to strike
us first is its triviality. But never mind its triviality: if we look at it
again, and more carefully, we see (1) that it refers to a statement,
and (2) to some facts; and (3) that it can therefore state the very
obvious conditions which we should expect to hold whenever we
wish to say that the statement referred to corresponds to the facts
referred to.
Those who think that this italicized paragraph is too trivial or
too simple to contain anything interesting should be reminded of
the fact, already referred to, that since everybody knows what
truth, or correspondence with the facts, means (as long as he does
not allow himself to speculate about it) this must be, in a sense, a
trivial matter.
That the idea formulated in the italicized paragraph is correct,
may be brought out by the following second italicized paragraph.
The assertion made by the witness, ‘Smith entered the
pawnshop shortly after 10.15 is true if and only if Smith entered
the pawnshop shortly after 10.15.
It is clear that this second italicized paragraph is again very
trivial. Nevertheless, it states in full the conditions for applying the
predicate ‘is true’ to any statement made by a witness.
Some people might think that a better way to formulate the
paragraph would be the following:
The assertion made by the witness ‘I saw that Smith entered the
pawnshop shortly after 10.15’ is true if and only if the witness saw
that Smith entered the pawnshop shortly after 10.15.
Comparing this third italicized paragraph with the second we
see that while the second gives the conditions for the truth of a
statement about Smith and what he did, the third gives the
conditions for the truth of a statement about the witness and what
he did (or saw). But this is the only difference between the two
paragraphs: both state the full conditions for the truth of the two
different statements which are quoted in them.
It is a rule of giving evidence that eye-witnesses should confine
themselves to stating what they actually saw. Compliance with this
rule may sometimes make it easier for the judge to distinguish
between true evidence and false evidence. Thus the third italicized
paragraph may perhaps be said to have some advantages over the

second, if regarded from the point of view of truth-seeking and
truth-finding.
But it is essential for our present purpose not to mix up
questions of actual truth-seeking or truth-finding (i.e.
epistemological or methodological questions) with the question of
what we mean, or what we intend to say, when we speak of truth,
or of correspondence with the facts (the logical or ontological
question of truth). Now from the latter point of view, the third
italicized paragraph has no advantage whatever over the second.
Each of them states to the full the conditions for the truth of the
statement to which it refers.
Each, therefore, answers the question—‘What is truth?’ in
precisely the same way; though each does it only indirectly, by
giving the conditions for the truth for a certain statement—and
each for a different statement.
2. Criteria
It is decisive to realize that knowing what truth means, or under
what conditions a statement is called true, is not the same as, and
must be clearly distinguished from, possessing a means of
deciding—a criterion for deciding—whether a given statement is
true or false.
The distinction I am referring to is a very general one, and it is
of considerable importance for an assessment of relativism, as we
shall see.
We may know, for example, what we mean by ‘good meat’ and
by ‘meat gone bad’; but we may not know how to tell the one from
the other, at least in some cases: it is this we have in mind when we
say that we have no criterion of the ‘goodness’ of good meat.
Similarly, every doctor knows, more or less, what he means by
‘tuberculosis’; but he may not always recognize it. And even
though there may be (by now) batteries of tests which amount
almost to a decision method,—that is to say, to a criterion—sixty
years ago there certainly were no such batteries of tests at the
disposal of doctors, and no criterion. But doctors knew then very
well what they meant—a lung infection due to a certain kind of
microbe.
Admittedly, a criterion—a definite method of decision—if we
could obtain one, might make everything clearer and more definite
and more precise. It is therefore understandable that some people,

hankering after precision, demand criteria. And if we can get them,
the demand may be reasonable.
But it would be a mistake to believe that, before we have a
criterion for deciding whether or not a man is suffering from
tuberculosis, the phrase ‘X is suffering from tuberculosis’ is
meaningless; or that, before we have a criterion of the goodness or
badness of meat, there is no point in considering whether or not a
piece of meat has gone bad; or that, before we have a reliable liedetector, we do not know what we mean when we say that X is
deliberately lying, and should therefore not even consider this
‘possibility’, since it is no possibility at all, but meaningless; or
that, before we have a criterion of truth, we do not know what we
mean when we say of a statement that it is true.
Thus those who insist that, without a criterion—a reliable
test—for tuberculosis, or lying, or truth, we cannot mean anything
by the words ‘tuberculosis’ or ‘lying’ or ‘true’, are certainly
mistaken. In fact, construction of a battery of tests for tuberculosis,
or for lying, comes after we have established—perhaps only
roughly—what we mean by ‘tuberculosis’ or by ‘lying’.
It is clear that in the course of developing tests for tuberculosis,
we may learn a lot more about this illness; so much, perhaps, that
we may say that the very meaning of the term ‘tuberculosis’ has
changed under the influence of our new knowledge, and that after
the establishment of the criterion the meaning of the term is no
longer the same as before. Some, perhaps, may even say that
‘tuberculosis’ can now be defined in terms of the criterion. But this
does not alter the fact that we meant something before—though we
may, of course, have known less about the thing. Nor does it alter
the fact that there are few diseases (if any) for which we have
either a criterion or a clear definition, and that few criteria (if any)
are reliable. (But if they are not reliable, we had better not call
them ‘criteria’.) There may be no criterion which helps us to
establish whether a pound note is, or is not, genuine. But should
we find two pound notes with the same serial number, we should
have good reasons to assert, even in the absence of a criterion, that
one of them at least is a forgery; and this assertion would clearly
not be made meaningless by the absence of a criterion of
genuineness.
To sum up, the theory that in order to determine what a word
means we must establish a criterion for its correct use, or for its

correct application, is mistaken: we practically never have such a
criterion.
3. Criterion Philosophies
The view just rejected—the view that we must have criteria in
order to know what we are talking about, whether it is tuberculosis,
lying, or existence, or meaning, or truth—is the overt or implicit
basis of many philosophies. A philosophy of this kind may be
called a ‘criterion philosophy’.
Since the basic demand of a criterion philosophy cannot as a
rule be met, it is clear that the adoption of a criterion-philosophy
will, in many cases, lead to disappointment, and to relativism or
scepticism.
I believe that it is the demand for a criterion of truth which has
made so many people feel that the question ‘What is truth?’ is
unanswerable. But the absence of a criterion of truth does not
render the notion of truth non-significant any more than the
absence of a criterion of health renders the notion of health nonsignificant. A sick man may seek health even though he has no
criterion for it. An erring man may seek truth even though he has
no criterion for it.
And both may simply seek health, or truth, without much
bothering about the meanings of these terms which they (and
others) understand well enough for their purposes.
One immediate result of Tarski’s work on truth is the following
theorem of logic: there can be no general criterion of truth (except
with respect to certain artificial language systems of a somewhat
impoverished kind).
This result can be exactly established; and its establishment
makes use of the notion of truth as correspondence with the facts.
We have here an interesting and philosophically very important
result (important especially in connection with the problem of an
authoritarian theory of knowledge 3). But this result has been
established with the help of a notion—in this case the notion of
truth—for which we have no criterion. The unreasonable demand
of the criterion-philosophies that we should not take a notion
seriously before a criterion has been established would therefore, if
adhered to in this case, have for ever prevented us from attaining a
logical result of great philosophical interest.
Incidentally, the result that there can be no general criterion of
truth is a direct consequence of the still more important result

(which Tarski obtained by combining Gödel’s undecidability
theorem with his own theory of truth) that there can be no general
criterion of truth even for the comparatively narrow field of
number theory, or for any science which makes full use of
arithmetic. It applies a fortiori to truth in any extra-mathematical
field in which unrestricted use is made of arithmetic.
4. Fallibilism
All this shows not only that some still fashionable forms of
scepticism and relativism are mistaken, but also that they are
obsolete; that they are based on a logical confusion—between the
meaning of a term and the criterion of its proper application—
although the means for clearing up this confusion have been
readily available for some thirty years.
It must be admitted, however, that there is a kernel of truth in
both scepticism and relativism. The kernel of truth is just that there
exists no general criterion of truth. But this does not warrant the
conclusion that the choice between competing theories is arbitrary.
It merely means, quite simply, that we can always err in our
choice—that we can always miss the truth, or fall short of the
truth; that certainty is not for us (nor even knowledge that is highly
probable, as I have shown in various places, for example in chapter
10 of Conjectures and Refutations]; that we are fallible. This, for
all we know, is no more than the plain truth. There are few fields
of human endeavour, if any, which seem to be exempt from human
fallibility. What we once thought to be well-established, or even
certain, may later turn out to be not quite correct (but this means
false), and in need of correction A particularly impressive example
of this is the discovery of heavy water, and of heavy hydrogen
(deuterium, first separated by Harold C. Urey in 1931). Prior to
this discovery, nothing more certain and more settled could be
imagined in the field of chemistry than our knowledge of water
(H2O) and of the chemical elements of which it is composed.
Water was even used for the ‘operational’ definition of the
gramme, the unit standard of mass of the ‘absolute’ metric system;
it thus formed one of the basic units of experimental physical
measurements. This illustrates the fact that our knowledge of water
was believed to be so well established that it could be used as the
firm basis of all other physical measurements. But after the
discovery of heavy water, it was realized that what had been
believed to be a chemically pure compound was actually a mixture

of chemically indistinguishable but physically very different
compounds, with very different densities, boiling points, and
freezing points—though for the definitions of all these points,
‘water’ had been used as a standard base.
This historical incident is typical; and we may learn from it that
we cannot foresee which parts of our scientific knowledge may
come to grief one day. Thus the belief in scientific certainty and in
the authority of science is just wishful thinking: science is fallible,
because science is human.
But the fallibility of our knowledge—or the thesis that all
knowledge is guesswork, though some consists of guesses which
have been most severely tested—must not be cited in support of
scepticism or relativism. From the fact that we can err, and that a
criterion of truth which might save us from error does not exist, it
does not follow that the choice between theories is arbitrary, or
non-rational: that we cannot learn, or get nearer to the truth: that
our knowledge cannot grow.
5. Fallibilism and the Growth of Knowledge
By ‘fallibilism’ I mean here the view, or the acceptance of the
fact, that we may err, and that the quest for certainty (or even the
quest for high probability) is a mistaken quest. But this does not
imply that the quest for truth is mistaken. On the contrary, the idea
of error implies that of truth as the standard of which we may fall
short. It implies that, though we may seek for truth, and though we
may even find truth (as I believe we do in very many cases), we
can never be quite certain that we have found it. There is always a
possibility of error; though in the case of some logical and
mathematical proofs, this possibility may be considered slight.
But fallibilism need in no way give rise to any sceptical or
relativist conclusions. This will become clear if we consider that
all the known historical examples of human fallibility—including
all the known examples of miscarriage of justice—are examples of
the advance of our knowledge. Every discovery of a mistake
constitutes a real advance in our knowledge. As Roger Martin du
Gard says in Jean Barois, ‘it is something if we know where truth
is not to be found’.
For example, although the discovery of heavy water showed
that we were badly mistaken, this was not only an advance in our
knowledge, but it was in its turn connected with other advances,

and it produced many further advances. Thus we can learn from
our mistakes.
This fundamental insight is, indeed, the basis of all
epistemology and methodology; for it gives us a hint how to learn
more systematically, how to advance more quickly (not necessarily
in the interests of technology: for each individual seeker after truth,
the problem of how to hasten one’s advance is most urgent). This
hint, very simply, is that we must search for our mistakes—or in
other words, that we must try to criticize our theories.
Criticism, it seems, is the only way we have of detecting our
mistakes, and of learning from them in a systematic way.
6. Getting Nearer to the Truth
In all this, the idea of the growth of knowledge—of getting
nearer to the truth—is decisive. Intuitively, this idea is as clear as
the idea of truth itself. A statement is true if it corresponds to the
facts. It is nearer to the truth than another statement if it
corresponds to the facts more closely than the other statement.
But though this idea is intuitively clear enough, and its
legitimacy is hardly questioned by ordinary people or by scientists,
it has, like the idea of truth, been attacked as illegitimate by some
philosophers (for example quite recently by W. V. Quine 4). It may
therefore be mentioned here that, combining two analyses of
Tarski, I have recently been able to give a ‘definition’ of the idea
of approaching to truth in the purely logical terms of Tarski’s
theory. (I simply combined the ideas of truth and of content,
obtaining the idea of the truth-content of a statement a, i.e. the
class of all true statements following from a, and its falsity content,
which can be defined, roughly, as its content minus its truth
content. We can then say that a statement a gets nearer to the truth
than a statement b if and only if its truth content has increased
without an increase in its falsity content; see chapter 10 of my
Conjectures and Refutations.) There is therefore no reason
whatever to be sceptical about the notion of getting nearer to the
truth, or of the advancement of knowledge. And though we may
always err, we have in many cases (especially in cases of crucial
tests deciding between two theories) a fair idea of whether or not
we have in fact got nearer to the truth.
It should be very clearly understood that the idea of one
statement a getting nearer to the truth than another statement b in
no way interferes with the idea that every statement is either true or

false, and that there is no third possibility. It only takes account of
the fact that there may be a lot of truth in a false statement. If I say
‘It is half past three—too late to catch the 3.35’ then my statement
might be false because it was not too late for the 3.35 (since the
3.35 happened to be four minutes late). But there was still a lot of
truth—of true information—in my statement; and though I might
have added ‘unless indeed the 3.35 is late (which it rarely is)’, and
thereby added to its truth-content, this additional remark might
well have been taken as understood. (My statement might also
have been false because it was only 3.28 not 3.30, when I made it.
But even then there was a lot of truth in it.)
A theory like Kepler’s which describes the track of the planets
with remarkable accuracy may be said to contain a lot of true
information, even though it is a false theory because deviations
from Kepler’s ellipses do occur. And Newton’s theory (even
though we may assume here that it is false) contains, for all we
know, a staggering amount of true information—much more than
Kepler’s theory. Thus Newton’s theory is a better approximation
than Kepler’s—it gets nearer to the truth. But this does not make it
true: it can be nearer to the truth and it can, at the same time, be a
false theory.
7. Absolutism
The idea of a philosophical absolutism is rightly repugnant to
many people since it is, as a rule, combined with a dogmatic and
authoritarian claim to possess the truth, or a criterion of truth.
But there is another form of absolutism—a fallibilistic
absolutism—which indeed rejects all this: it merely asserts that our
mistakes, at least, are absolute mistakes, in the sense that if a
theory deviates from the truth, it is simply false, even if the
mistake made was less glaring than that in another theory. Thus the
notions of truth, and of falling short of the truth, can represent
absolute standards for the fallibilist. This kind of absolutism is
completely free from any taint of authoritarianism. And it is a great
help in serious critical discussions. Of course, it can be criticized in
its turn, in accordance with the principle that nothing is exempt
from criticism. But at least at the moment it seems to me unlikely
that criticism of the (logical) theory of truth and the theory of
getting nearer to the truth will succeed.

8. Sources of Knowledge
The principle that everything is open to criticism (from which
this principle itself is not exempt) leads to a simple solution of the
problem of the sources of knowledge, as I have tried to show
elsewhere (see the Introduction to my Conjectures and
Refutations), It is this: every ‘source ‘—tradition, reason,
imagination, observation, or what not—is admissible and may be
used, but none has any authority.
This denial of authority to the sources of knowledge attributes
to them a role very different from that which they were supposed
to play in past and present epistemologies. But it is part of our
critical and fallibilist approach: every source is welcome, but no
statement is immune from criticism, whatever its ‘source’ may be.
Tradition, more especially, which both the intellectualists
(Descartes) and the empiricists (Bacon) tended to reject, can be
admitted by us as one of the most important ‘sources’, since almost
all that we learn (from our elders, in school, from books) stems
from it. I therefore hold that anti-traditionalism must be rejected as
futile. Yet traditionalism—which stresses the authority of
traditions—must be rejected too; not as futile, but as mistaken—
just as mistaken as any other epistemology which accepts some
source of knowledge (intellectual intuition, say, or sense intuition)
as an authority, or a guarantee, or a criterion, of truth.
9. Is a Critical Method Possible?
But if we really reject any claim to authority, of any particular
source of knowledge, how can we then criticize any theory? Does
not all criticism proceed from some assumptions? Does not the
validity of any criticism, therefore, depend upon the truth of these
assumptions? And what is the good of criticizing a theory if the
criticism should turn out to be invalid? Yet in order to show that it
is valid, must we not establish, or justify, its assumptions? And is
not the establishment or the justification of any assumption just the
thing which everybody attempts (though often in vain) and which I
here declare to be impossible? But if it is impossible, is not then
(valid) criticism impossible too?
I believe that it is this series of questions or objections which
has largely barred the way to a (tentative) acceptance of the point
of view here advocated: as these questions show, one may easily
be led to believe that the critical method is, logically considered, in
the same boat with all other methods: since it cannot work without

making assumptions, it would have to establish or justify those
assumptions; yet the whole point of our argument was that we
cannot establish or justify anything as certain, or even as probable,
but have to content ourselves with theories which withstand
criticism.
Obviously, these objections are very serious. They bring out
the importance of our principle that nothing is exempt from
criticism, or should be held to be exempt from criticism—not even
this principle of the critical method itself.
Thus these objections constitute an interesting and important
criticism of my position. But this criticism can in its turn be
criticized; and it can be refuted.
First of all, even if we were to admit that all criticism starts
from certain assumptions, this would not necessarily mean that, for
it to be valid criticism, these assumptions must be established and
justified. For the assumptions may, for example, be part of the
theory against which the criticism is directed. (In this case we
speak of ‘immanent criticism’.) Or they may be assumptions which
would be generally found acceptable, even though they do not
form part of the theory criticized. In this case the criticism would
amount to pointing out that the theory criticized contradicts
(unknown to its defenders) some generally accepted views. This
kind of criticism may be very valuable even when it is
unsuccessful; for it may lead the defenders of the criticized theory
to question those generally accepted views, and this may lead to
important discoveries. (An interesting example is the history of
Dirac’s theory of anti-particles.)
Or they may be assumptions which are of the nature of a
competing theory (in which case the criticism may be called
‘transcendent criticism’, in contradistinction to ‘immanent
criticism’): the assumptions may be, for example, hypotheses, or
guesses, which can be independently criticized and tested. In this
case the criticism offered would amount to a challenge to carry out
certain crucial tests in order to decide between two competing
theories.
These examples show that the important objections raised here
against my theory of criticism are based upon the untenable dogma
that criticism, in order to be ‘valid’, must proceed from
assumptions which are established or justified.
Moreover, criticism may be important, enlightening, and even
fruitful, without being valid: the arguments used in order to reject

some invalid criticism may throw a lot of new light upon a theory,
and can be used as a (tentative) argument in its favour; and of a
theory which can thus defend itself against criticism we may well
say that it is supported by critical arguments.
Quite generally, we may say that valid criticism of a theory
consists in pointing out that a theory does not succeed in solving
the problems which it was supposed to solve; and if we look at
criticism in this light then it certainly need not be dependent on any
particular set of assumptions (that is, it can be ‘immanent’), even
though it may well be that some assumptions which were foreign
to the theory under discussion (that is, some ‘transcendent’
assumptions) inspired it to start with.
10. Decisions
From the point of view here developed, theories are not, in
general, capable of being established or justified; and although
they may be supported by critical arguments, this support is never
conclusive. Accordingly, we shall frequently have to make up our
minds whether or not these critical arguments are strong enough to
justify the tentative acceptance of the theory—or in other words,
whether the theory seems preferable, in the light of the critical
discussion, to the competing theories.
In this sense, decisions enter into the critical method. But it is
always a tentative decision, and a decision subject to criticism.
As such it should be contrasted with what has been called
‘decision’ or ‘leap in the dark’ by some irrationalist or antirationalist or existentialist philosophers. These philosophers,
probably under the impact of the argument (rejected in the
preceding section) of the impossibility of criticism without
presuppositions, developed the theory that all our tenets must be
based on some fundamental decision—on some leap in the dark. It
must be a decision, a leap, which we take with closed eyes, as it
were; for as we cannot ‘know’ without assumptions, without
already having taken up a fundamental position, this fundamental
position cannot be taken up on the basis of knowledge. It is, rather,
a choice—but a kind of fateful and almost irrevocable choice, one
which we take blindly, or by instinct, or by chance or by the grace
of God.
Our rejection of the objections presented in the preceding
section shows that the irrationalist view of decisions is an
exaggeration as well as an over-dramatization. Admittedly, we

must decide. But unless we decide against listening to argument
and reason, against learning from our mistakes, and against
listening to others who may have objections to our views, our
decisions need not be final; not even the decision to consider
criticism. (It is only in its decision not to take an irrevocable leap
into the darkness of irrationality that rationalism may be said not to
be self-contained, in the sense of chapter 24.)
I believe that the critical theory of knowledge here sketched
throws some light upon the great problems of all theories of
knowledge: how it is that we know so much and so little; and how
it is that we can lift ourselves slowly out of the swamp of
ignorance—by our own bootstraps, as it were. We do so by
working with guesses, and by improving upon our guesses,
through criticism.
11. Social and Political Problems
The theory of knowledge sketched in the preceding sections of
this addendum, seems to me to have important consequences for
the evaluation of the social situation of our time, a situation
influenced to a large extent by the decline of authoritarian religion.
This decline has led to a widespread relativism and nihilism: to the
decline of all beliefs, even the belief in human reason, and thus in
ourselves.
But the argument here developed shows that there are no
grounds whatever for drawing such desperate conclusions. The
relativistic and the nihilistic (and even the ‘existentialistic’)
arguments are all based on faulty reasoning. In this they show,
incidentally, that these philosophies actually do accept reason, but
are unable to use it properly; in their own terminology we might
say that they fail to understand ‘the human situation’, and
especially man’s ability to grow, intellectually and morally.
As a striking illustration of this misunderstanding—of
desperate consequences drawn from an insufficient understanding
of the epistemological situation—I will quote a passage from one
of Nietzsche’s Tracts Against the Times (from section 3 of his
essay on Schopenhauer).
‘This was the first danger in whose shadow Schopenhauer
grew up: isolation. The second was: despair of finding the
truth. This latter danger is the constant companion of every
thinker who sets out from Kant’s philosophy; that is if he is a
real man, a living human being, able to suffer and yearn, and

not a mere rattling automaton, a mere thinking and calculating
machine ... Though I am reading everywhere that [owing to
Kant] ... a revolution has started in all fields of thought, I
cannot believe that this is so as yet ... But should Kant one day
begin to exert a more general influence, then we shall find that
this will take the form of a creeping and destructive scepticism
and relativism; and only the most active and the most noble of
minds ... will instead experience that deep emotional shock,
and that despair of truth, which was felt for example by
Heinrich von Kleist . . .
“Recently”, he wrote, in his moving way, “I have become
acquainted with the philosophy of Kant; and I must tell you of
a thought of which I need not be afraid that it will shake you as
deeply and as painfully as it shook me:—It is impossible for us
to decide whether that to which we appeal as truth is in truth
the truth, or whether it merely seems to us so. If it is the latter,
then all that truth to which we may attain here will be as
nothing after our death, and all our efforts to produce and
acquire something that might survive us must be in vain.—If
the sharp point of this thought does not pierce your heart, do
not smile at one who feels wounded by it in the holiest depth of
his soul. My highest, my only aim has fallen to the ground, and
I have none left.”’
I agree with Nietzsche that Kleist’s words are moving; and I
agree that Kleist’s reading of Kant’s doctrine that it is impossible
to attain any knowledge of things in themselves is straightforward
enough, even though it conflicts with Kant’s own intentions; for
Kant believed in the possibility of science, and of finding the truth.
(It was only the need to explain the paradox of the existence of an
a priori science of nature which led him to adopt that subjectivism
which Kleist rightly found shocking.) Moreover, Kleist’s despair is
at least partly the result of disappointment—of seeing the downfall
of an over-optimistic belief in a simple criterion of truth (such as
self-evidence). Yet whatever may be the history of this philosophic
despair, it is not called for. Though truth is not self-revealing (as
Cartesians and Baconians thought), though certainty may be
unattainable, the human situation with respect to knowledge is far
from desperate. On the contrary, it is exhilarating: here we are,
with the immensely difficult task before us of getting to know the
beautiful world we live in, and ourselves; and fallible though we
are we nevertheless find that our powers of understanding,

surprisingly, are almost adequate for the task—more so than we
ever dreamt in our wildest dreams. We really do learn from our
mistakes, by trial and error. And at the same time we learn how
little we know—as when, in climbing a mountain, every step
upwards opens some new vista into the unknown, and new worlds
unfold themselves of whose existence we knew nothing when we
began our climb.
Thus we can learn, we can grow in knowledge, even if we can
never know—that is, know for certain. Since we can learn, there is
no reason for despair of reason; and since we can never know,
there are no grounds here for smugness, or for conceit over the
growth of our knowledge.
It may be said that this new way of knowing is too abstract and
too sophisticated to replace the loss of authoritarian religion. This
may be true. But we must not underrate the power of the intellect
and the intellectuals. It was the intellectuals—the ‘second-hand
dealers in ideas’, as F. A. Hayek calls them—who spread
relativism, nihilism, and intellectual despair. There is no reason
why some intellectuals—some more enlightened intellectuals—
should not eventually succeed in spreading the good news that the
nihilist ado was indeed about nothing.
12. Dualism of Facts and Standards
In the body of this book I spoke about the dualism of facts and
decisions, and I pointed out, following L. J. Russell (see note 5 (3)
to chapter 5, vol. i, p. 234), that this dualism may be described as
one of propositions and proposals. The latter terminology has the
advantage of reminding us that both propositions, which state
facts, and proposals, which propose policies, including principles
or standards of policy, are open to rational discussion. Moreover, a
decision—one, say, concerning the adoption of a principle of
conduct—reached after the discussion of a proposal, may well be
tentative, and it may be in many respects very similar to a decision
to adopt (also tentatively), as the best available hypothesis, a
proposition which states a fact.
There is, however, an important difference here. For the
proposal to adopt a policy or a standard, its discussion, and the
decision to adopt it, may be said to create this policy or this
standard. On the other hand, the proposal of a hypothesis, its
discussion, and the decision to adopt it—or to accept a
proposition—does not, in the same sense, create a fact. This, I

suppose, was the reason why I thought that the term ‘decision’
would be able to express the contrast between the acceptance of
policies or standards, and the acceptance of facts. Yet there is no
doubt that it would have been clearer had I spoken of a dualism of
facts and policies, or of a dualism of facts and standards, rather
than of a dualism of facts and decisions.
Terminology apart, the important thing is the irreducible
dualism itself: whatever the facts may be, and whatever the
standards may be (for example, the principles of our policies), the
first thing is to distinguish the two, and to see clearly why
standards cannot be reduced to facts.
13. Proposals and Propositions
There is, then, a decisive asymmetry between standards and
facts: through the decision to accept a proposal (at least tentatively)
we create the corresponding standard (at least tentatively); yet
through the decision to accept a proposition we do not create the
corresponding fact.
Another asymmetry is that standards always pertain to facts,
and that facts are evaluated by standards; these are relations which
cannot be simply turned round.
Whenever we are faced with a fact—and more especially, with
a fact which we may be able to change—we can ask whether or not
it complies with certain standards. It is important to realize that this
is very far from being the same as asking whether we like it; for
although we may often adopt standards which correspond to our
likes or dislikes, and although our likes and dislikes may play an
important role in inducing us to adopt or reject some proposed
standard, there will as a rule be many other possible standards
which we have not adopted; and it will be possible to judge, or
evaluate, the facts by any of them. This shows that the relationship
of evaluation (of some questionable fact by some adopted or
rejected standard) is, logically considered, totally different from a
person’s psychological relation (which is not a standard but a fact),
of like or dislike, to the fact in question, or to the standard in
question. Moreover, our likes and dislikes are facts which can be
evaluated like any other facts.
Similarly, the fact that a certain standard has been adopted or
rejected by some person or by some society must, as a fact, be
distinguished from any standard, including the adopted or rejected

standard. And since it is a fact (and an alterable fact) it may be
judged or evaluated by some (other) standards.
These are a few reasons why standards and facts, and therefore
proposals and propositions, should be clearly and decisively
distinguished. Yet once they have been distinguished, we may look
not only at the dissimilarities of facts and standards but also at their
similarities.
First, both proposals and propositions are alike in that we can
discuss them, criticize them, and come to some decision about
them. Secondly, there is some kind of regulative idea about both.
In the realm of facts it is the idea of correspondence between a
statement or a proposition and a fact; that is to say, the idea of
truth. In the realm of standards, or of proposals, the regulative idea
may be described in many ways, and called by many terms, for
example, by the terms ‘right’ or ‘good’. We may say of a proposal
that it is right (or wrong) or perhaps good (or bad); and by this we
may mean, perhaps, that it corresponds (or does not correspond) to
certain standards which we have decided to adopt. But we may
also say of a standard that it is right or wrong, or good or bad, or
valid or invalid, or high or low; and by this we may mean, perhaps,
that the corresponding proposal should or should not be accepted.
It must therefore be admitted that the logical situation of the
regulative ideas, of ‘right’, say, or ‘good’, is far less clear than that
of the idea of correspondence to the facts.
As pointed out in the book, this difficulty is a logical one and
cannot be got over by the introduction of a religious system of
standards. The fact that God, or any other authority, commands me
to do a certain thing is no guarantee that the command is right. It is
I who must decide whether to accept the standards of any authority
as (morally) good or bad. God is good only if His commandments
are good; it would be a grave mistake—in fact an immoral
adoption of authoritarianism—to say that His commandments are
good simply because they are His, unless we have first decided (at
our own risk) that He can only demand good or right things of us.
This is Kant’s idea of autonomy, as opposed to heteronomy.
Thus no appeal to authority, not even to religious authority, can
get us out of the difficulty that the regulative idea of absolute
‘rightness’ or ‘goodness’ differs in its logical status from that of
absolute truth; and we have to admit the difference. This difference
is responsible for the fact, alluded to above, that in a sense we
create our standards by proposing, discussing, and adopting them.

All this must be admitted; nevertheless we may take the idea of
absolute truth—of correspondence to the facts—as a kind of model
for the realm of standards, in order to make it clear to ourselves
that, just as we may seek for absolutely true propositions in the
realm of facts or at least for propositions which come nearer to the
truth, so we may seek for absolutely right or valid proposals in the
realm of standards—or at least for better, or more valid, proposals.
However, it would be a mistake, in my opinion, to extend this
attitude beyond the seeking to the finding. For though we should
seek for absolutely right or valid proposals, we should never
persuade ourselves that we have definitely found them; for clearly,
there cannot be a criterion of absolute rightness—even less than a
criterion of absolute truth. The maximization of happiness may
have been intended as a criterion. On the other hand I certainly
never recommended that we adopt the minimization of misery as a
criterion, though I think that it is an improvement on some of the
ideas of utilitarianism. I also suggested that the reduction of
avoidable misery belongs to the agenda of public policy (which
does not mean that any question of public policy is to be decided
by a calculus of minimizing misery) while the maximization of
one’s happiness should be left to one’s private endeavour. (I quite
agree with those critics of mine who have shown that if used as a
criterion, the minimum misery principle would have absurd
consequences; and I expect that the same may be said about any
other moral criterion.)
But although we have no criterion of absolute rightness, we
certainly can make progress in this realm. As in the realm of facts,
we can make discoveries. That cruelty is always ‘bad’; that it
should always be avoided where possible; that the golden rule is a
good standard which can perhaps even be improved by doing unto
others, wherever possible, as they want to be done by: these are
elementary and extremely important examples of discoveries in the
realm of standards.
These discoveries create standards, we might say, out of
nothing: as in the field of factual discovery, we have to lift
ourselves by our own bootstraps. This is the incredible fact: that
we can learn; by our mistakes, and by criticism; and that we can
learn in the realm of standards just as well as in the realm of facts.

14. Two Wrongs do Not Make Two Rights
Once we have accepted the absolute theory of truth it is
possible to answer an old and serious yet deceptive argument in
favour of relativism, of both the intellectual and the evaluative
kind, by making use of the analogy between true facts and valid
standards. The deceptive argument I have in mind appeals to the
discovery that other people have ideas and beliefs which differ
widely from ours. Who are we to insist that ours are the right ones?
Already Xenophanes sang, 2500 years ago (Diels-Kranz B, 16,
15):
The Ethiops say that their gods are flat-nosed and black, While
the Thracians say that theirs have blue eyes and red hair. Yet if
cattle or horses or lions had hands and could draw, And could
sculpture like men, then the horses would draw their gods Like
horses, and cattle like cattle; and each they would shape Bodies of
gods in the likeness, each kind, of their own.
So each of us sees his gods, and his world, from his own point
of view, according to his tradition and his upbringing; and none of
us is exempt from this subjective bias.
This argument has been developed in various ways; and it has
been argued that our race, or our nationality, or our historical
background, or our historical period, or our class interest, or our
social habitat, or our language, or our personal background
knowledge, is an insurmountable, or an almost insurmountable,
barrier to objectivity.
The facts on which this argument is based must be admitted;
and indeed, we can never rid ourselves of bias. There is, however,
no need to accept the argument itself, or its relativistic conclusions.
For first of all, we can, in stages, get rid of some of this bias, by
means of critical thinking and especially of listening to criticism.
For example, Xenophanes doubtless was helped, by his own
discovery, to see things in a less biassed way. Secondly, it is a fact
that people with the most divergent cultural backgrounds can enter
into fruitful discussion, provided they are interested in getting
nearer to the truth, and are ready to listen to each other, and to
learn from each other. This shows that, though there are cultural
and linguistic barriers, they are not insurmountable.
Thus it is of the utmost importance to profit from Xenophanes’
discovery in every field; to give up cocksureness, and become
open to criticism. Yet it is also of the greatest importance not to
mistake this discovery, this step towards criticism, for a step

towards relativism. If two parties disagree, this may mean that one
is wrong, or the other, or both: this is the view of the criticist. It
does not mean, as the relativist will have it, that both may be
equally right. They may be equally wrong, no doubt, though they
need not be. But anybody who says that to be equally wrong means
to be equally right is merely playing with words, or with
metaphors.
It is a great step forward to learn to be self-critical; to learn to
think that the other fellow may be right—more right than we
ourselves. But there is a great danger involved in this: we may
think that both, the other fellow and we ourselves, may be right.
But this attitude, modest and self-critical as it may appear to us, is
neither as modest nor as self-critical as we may be inclined to
think; for it is more likely that both, we ourselves and the other
fellow, are wrong. Thus self-criticism should not be an excuse for
laziness and for the adoption of relativism. And as two wrongs do
not make a right, two wrong parties to a dispute do not make two
right parties.
15. ‘Experience’ and ‘Intuition’ as Sources of Knowledge
The fact that we can learn from our mistakes, and through
criticism, in the realm of standards as well as in the realm of facts,
is of fundamental importance. But is the appeal to criticism
sufficient? Do we not have to appeal to the authority of experience
or (especially in the realm of standards) of intuition?
In the realm of facts, we do not merely criticize our theories,
we criticize them by an appeal to experimental and observational
experience. It is a serious mistake, however, to believe that we can
appeal to anything like an authority of experience, though
philosophers, particularly empiricist philosophers, have depicted
sense perception, and especially sight, as a source of knowledge
which furnishes us with definite ‘data’ out of which our experience
is composed. I believe that this picture is totally mistaken. For
even our experimental and observational experience does not
consist of ‘data’. Rather, it consists of a web of guesses—of
conjectures, expectations, hypotheses, with which there are
interwoven accepted, traditional, scientific, and unscientific, lore
and prejudice. There simply is no such thing as pure experimental
and observational experience—experience untainted by
expectation and theory. There are no pure ‘data’, no empirically
given ‘sources of knowledge’ to which we can appeal, in our

criticism. ‘Experience’, whether ordinary or scientific experience,
is much more like what Oscar Wilde had in mind in Lady
Windermere’s Fan, Act III:
Dumby: Experience is the name everyone gives to their
mistakes.
Cecil Graham: One shouldn’t commit any.
Dumby: Life would be very dull without them.
Learning from our mistakes—without which life would indeed
be dull—is also the meaning of ‘experience’ which is implied in
Dr. Johnson’s famous joke about ‘the triumph of hope over
experience’; or in C. C. King’s remark (in his Story of the British
Army, 1897, p. 112): ‘But the British leaders were to learn ... in the
“only school fools learn in, that of experience”.’
It seems, then, that at least some of the ordinary uses of
‘experience’ agree much more closely with what I believe to be the
character of both ‘scientific experience’ and ‘ordinary empirical
knowledge’ than with the traditional analyses of the philosophers
of the empiricist schools. And all this seems to agree also with the
original meaning of ‘empeiria’ (from ‘peiraō’—to try, to test, to
examine) and thus of ‘experientia’ and ‘experimentum’. Yet it
must not be held to constitute an argument; neither one from
ordinary usage nor one from origin. It is intended only to illustrate
my logical analysis of the structure of experience. According to
this analysis, experience, and more especially scientific experience,
is the result of usually mistaken guesses, of testing them, and of
learning from our mistakes. Experience (in this sense) is not a
‘source of knowledge’; nor does it carry any authority.
Thus criticism which appeals to experience is not of an
authoritative character. It does not consist in contrasting dubious
results with established ones, or with ‘the evidence of our senses’
(or with ‘the given’). It consists, rather, in comparing some
dubious results with others, often equally dubious, which may,
however, be taken as unproblematic for the moment, although they
may at any time be challenged as new doubts arise, or else because
of some inkling or conjecture; an inkling or a conjecture, for
example, that a certain experiment may lead to a new discovery.
Now the situation in acquiring knowledge about standards
seems to me altogether analogous.
Here, too, philosophers have looked for the authoritative
sources of this knowledge, and they found, in the main, two:
feelings of pleasure and pain, or a moral sense or a moral intuition

for what is right or wrong (analogous to perception in the
epistemology of factual knowledge), or, alternatively, a source
called ‘practical reason’ (analogous to ‘pure reason’, or to a faculty
of ‘intellectual intuition’, in the epistemology of factual
knowledge). And quarrels continually raged over the question
whether all, or only some, of these authoritative sources of moral
knowledge existed.
I think that this problem is a pseudo-problem. The main point
is not the question of the ‘existence’ of any of these faculties—a
very vague and dubious psychological question—but whether
these may be authoritative ‘sources of knowledge’ providing us
with ‘data’ or other definite starting-points for our constructions or,
at least, with a definite frame of reference for our criticism. I deny
that we have any authoritative sources of this kind, either in the
epistemology of factual knowledge or in the epistemology of the
knowledge of standards. And I deny that we need any such definite
frame of reference for our criticism.
How do we learn about standards? How, in this realm, do we
learn from our mistakes? First we learn to imitate others
(incidentally, we do so by trial and error), and so learn to look
upon standards of behaviour as if they consisted of fixed, ‘given’
rules. Later we find (also by trial and error) that we are making
mistakes—for example, that we may hurt people. We may thus
learn the golden rule; but soon we find that we may misjudge a
man’s attitude, his background knowledge, his aims, his standards;
and we may learn from our mistakes to take care even beyond the
golden rule.
Admittedly, such things as sympathy and imagination may play
an important role in this development; but they are not
authoritative sources of knowledge—no more than any of our
sources in the realm of the knowledge of facts. And though
something like an intuition of what is right and what is wrong may
also play an important role in this development, it is, again, not an
authoritative source of knowledge. For we may see today very
clearly that we are right, and yet learn tomorrow that we made a
mistake.
‘Intuitionism’ is the name of a philosophical school which
teaches that we have some faculty or capacity of intellectual
intuition allowing us to ‘see’ the truth; so that what we have seen
to be true must indeed be true. It is thus a theory of some
authoritative source of knowledge. Anti-intuitionists have usually

denied the existence of this source of knowledge while asserting,
as a rule, the existence of some other source such as senseperception. My view is that both parties are mistaken, for two
reasons. First, I assert that there exists something like an
intellectual intuition which makes us feel, most convincingly, that
we see the truth (a point denied by the opponents of intuitionism).
Secondly, I assert that this intellectual intuition, though in a way
indispensable, often leads us astray in the most dangerous manner.
Thus we do not, in general, see the truth when we are most
convinced that we see it; and we have to learn, through mistakes,
to distrust these intuitions.
What, then, are we to trust? What are we to accept? The answer
is: whatever we accept we should trust only tentatively, always
remembering that we are in possession, at best, of partial truth (or
rightness), and that we are bound to make at least some mistake or
misjudgment somewhere—not only with respect to facts but also
with respect to the adopted standards; secondly, we should trust
(even tentatively) our intuition only if it has been arrived at as the
result of many attempts to use our imagination; of many mistakes,
of many tests, of many doubts, and of searching criticism.
It will be seen that this form of anti-intuitionism (or some may
say, perhaps, of intuitionism) is radically different from the older
forms of anti-intuitionism. And it will be seen that there is one
essential ingredient in this theory: the idea that we may fall short—
perhaps always—of some standard of absolute truth, or of absolute
rightness, in our opinions as well as in our actions.
It may be objected to all this that, whether or not my views on
the nature of ethical knowledge and ethical experience are
acceptable, they are still ‘relativist’ or ‘subjectivist’. For they do
not establish any absolute moral standards: at best they show that
the idea of an absolute standard is a regulative idea, of use to those
who are already converted—who are already eager to learn about,
and search for, true or valid or good moral standards. My reply is
that even the ‘establishment’—say, by means of pure logic—of an
absolute standard, or a system of ethical norms, would make no
difference in this respect. For assuming we have succeeded in
logically proving the validity of an absolute standard, or a system
of ethical norms, so that we could logically prove to somebody
how he ought to act: even then he might take no notice; or else he
might reply: ‘I am not in the least interested in your “ought”, or in
your moral rules—no more so than in your logical proofs, or, say,

in your higher mathematics.’ Thus even a logical proof cannot alter
the fundamental situation that only he who is prepared to take
these things seriously and to learn about them will be impressed by
ethical (or any other) arguments. You cannot force anybody by
arguments to take arguments seriously, or to respect his own
reason.
16. The Dualism of Facts and Standards and the Idea of
Liberalism
The dualism of facts and standards is, I contend, one of the
bases of the liberal tradition. For an essential part of this tradition
is the recognition of the injustice that does exist in this world, and
the resolve to try to help those who are its victims. This means that
there is, or that there may be, a conflict, or at least a gap, between
facts and standards: facts may fall short of right (or valid or true)
standards—especially those social or political facts which consist
in the actual acceptance and enforcement of some code of justice.
To put it in another way, liberalism is based upon the dualism
of facts and standards in the sense that it believes in searching for
ever better standards, especially in the field of politics and of
legislation.
But this dualism of facts and standards has been rejected by
some relativists who have opposed it with arguments like the
following:
(1) The acceptance of a proposal—and thus of a standard—is a
social or political or historical fact.
(2) If an accepted standard is judged by another, not yet
accepted standard, and found wanting, then this judgment
(whoever may have made it) is also a social or political or
historical fact.
(3) If a judgment of this kind becomes the basis of a social or
political movement, then this is also a historical fact.
(4) If this movement is successful, and if in consequence the
old standards are reformed or replaced by new standards, then this
is also a historical fact.
(5) Thus—so argues the relativist or moral positivist—we
never have to transcend the realm of facts, if only we include in it
social or political or historical facts: there is no dualism of facts
and standards.
I consider this conclusion (5) to be mistaken. It does not follow
from the premises (1) to (4) whose truth I admit. The reason for

rejecting (5) is very simple: we can always ask whether a
development as here described—a social movement based upon
the acceptance of a programme for the reform of certain
standards—was ‘good’ or ‘bad’. In raising this question, we reopen the gulf between standards and facts which the monistic
argument (1) to (5) attempts to close.
From what I have just said, it may be rightly inferred that the
monistic position—the philosophy of the identity of facts and
standards—is dangerous; for even where it docs not identify
standards with existing facts—even where it does not identify
present might and right—it leads necessarily to the identification
of future might and right. Since the question whether a certain
movement for reform is right or wrong (or good or bad) cannot be
raised, according to the monist, except in terms of another
movement with opposite tendencies, nothing can be asked except
the question which of these opposite movements succeeded, in the
end, in establishing its standards as a matter of social or political or
historical fact.
In other words, the philosophy here described—the attempt to
‘transcend’ the dualism of facts arid standards and to erect a
monistic system, a world of facts only—leads to the identification
of standards either with established might or with future might: it
leads to a moral positivism, or to a moral historicism, as described
and discussed in chapter 22 of this book.
17. Hegel Again
My chapter on Hegel has been much criticized. Most of the
criticism I cannot accept, because it fails to answer my main
objections against Hegel—that his philosophy exemplifies, if
compared with that of Kant (I still find it almost sacrilegious to put
these two names side by side), a terrible decline in intellectual
sincerity and intellectual honesty; that his philosophical arguments
are not to be taken seriously; and that his philosophy was a major
factor in bringing about the ‘age of intellectual dishonesty’, as
Konrad Heiden called it, and in preparing for that contemporary
trahison des clercs (I am alluding to Julien Benda’s great book)
which has helped to produce two world wars so far.
It should not be forgotten that I looked upon my book as my
war effort: believing as I did in the responsibility of Hegel and the
Hegelians for much of what happened in Germany, I felt that it

was my task, as a philosopher, to show that this philosophy was a
pseudo-philosophy.
The time at which the book was written may perhaps also
explain my optimistic assumption (which I could attribute to
Schopenhauer) that the stark realities of the war would show up the
playthings of the intellectuals, such as relativism, as what they
were, and that this verbal spook would disappear.
I certainly was too optimistic. Indeed, it seems that most of my
critics took some form of relativism so much for granted that they
were quite unable to believe that I was really in earnest in rejecting
it.
I admit that I made some factual mistakes: Mr. H. N. Rodman,
of Harvard University, has told me that I was mistaken in writing
‘two years’ in the third line from the bottom of p. 28, and that I
ought to have written ‘four years’. He also told me that there are,
in his opinion, a number of more serious—if less clear-cut—
historical errors in the chapter, and that some of my attributions of
ulterior motives to Hegel are, in his opinion, historically
unjustified.
Such things are very much to be regretted, although they have
happened to better historians than I. But the question of real
importance is this: do these mistakes affect my assessment of
Hegel’s philosophy, and of its disastrous influence?
My own answer to the question is: ‘No.’ It is his philosophy
which has led me to look upon Hegel as I do, not his biography. In
fact, I am still surprised that serious philosophers were offended by
my admittedly partly playful attack upon a philosophy which I am
still unable to take seriously. I tried to express this by the scherzostyle of my Hegel chapter, hoping to expose the ridiculous in this
philosophy which I can only regard with a mixture of contempt
and horror.
All this was clearly indicated in my book; also the fact that I
neither could5 nor wished to spend unlimited time upon deep
researches into the history of a philosopher whose work I abhor.
As it was, I wrote about Hegel in a manner which assumed that
few would take him seriously. And although this manner was lost
upon my Hegelian critics, who were decidedly not amused, I still
hope that some of my readers got the joke.
But all this is comparatively unimportant. What may be
important is the question whether my attitude towards Hegel’s

philosophy was justified. It is a contribution towards an answer to
this question which I wish to make here.
I think most Hegelians will admit that one of the fundamental
motives and intentions of Hegel’s philosophy is precisely to
replace and ‘transcend’ the dualistic view of facts and standards
which had been presented by Kant, and which was the
philosophical basis of the idea of liberalism and of social reform.
To transcend this dualism of facts and standards is the decisive
aim of Hegel’s philosophy of identity—the identity of the ideal and
the real, of right and might. All standards are historical: they are
historical facts, stages in the development of reason, which is the
same as the development of the ideal and of the real. There is
nothing but fact; and some of the social or historical facts are, at
the same time, standards.
Now Hegel’s argument was, fundamentally, the one I stated
(and criticized) here in the preceding section—although Hegel
presented it in a surpassingly vague, unclear, and specious form.
Moreover, I contend that this identity philosophy (despite some
‘progressivist’ suggestions, and some mild expressions of
sympathy with various ‘progressive’ movements which it
contained) played a major role in the downfall of the liberal
movement in Germany; a movement which, under the influence of
Kant’s philosophy, had produced such important liberal thinkers as
Schiller and Wilhelm von Humboldt, and such important works as
Humboldt’s Essay towards the Determination of the Limits of the
Powers of the State.
This is my first ad fundamental accusation. My second
accusation, closely connected with the first, is that Hegel’s identity
philosophy, by contributing to historicism and to an identification
of might and right, encouraged totalitarian modes of thought.
My third accusation is that Hegel’s argument (which
admittedly required of him a certain degree of subtlety, though not
more than a great philosopher might be expected to possess) was
full of logical mistakes and of tricks, presented with pretentious
impressiveness. This undermined and eventually lowered the
traditional standards of intellectual responsibility and honesty. It
also contributed to the rise of totalitarian philosophizing and, even
more serious, to the lack of any determined intellectual resistance
to it.
These are my principal objections to Hegel stated, I believe,
fairly clearly in chapter 12. But I certainly did not analyse the

fundamental issue—the philosophy of identity of facts and
standards—quite as clearly as I ought to have done. So I hope I
have made amends in this addendum—not to Hegel, but to those
who may have been harmed by him.
18. Conclusion
In ending my book once again, I am as conscious as ever of its
imperfections. In part, these imperfections are a consequence of its
scope, which transcends what I should consider as my more
professional interests. In part they are simply a consequence of my
personal fallibility: it is not for nothing that I am a fallibilist. But
though I am very conscious of my personal fallibility, even as it
affects what I am going to say now, I do believe that a fallibilist
approach has much to offer to the social philosopher. By
recognizing the essentially critical and therefore revolutionary
character of all human thought—of the fact that we learn from our
mistakes, rather than by the accumulation of data—and by
recognizing on the other hand that almost all the problems as well
as the (non-authoritative) sources of our thought are rooted in
traditions, and that it is almost always traditions which we criticize,
a critical (and progressive) fallibilism may provide us with a muchneeded perspective for the evaluation of both, tradition and
revolutionary thought. Even more important, it can show us that
the role of thought is to carry out revolutions by means of critical
debates rather than by means of violence and of warfare; that it is
the great tradition of Western rationalism to fight our battles with
words rather than with swords. This is why our Western
civilization is an essentially pluralistic one, and why monolithic
social ends would mean the death of freedom: of the freedom of
thought, of the free search for truth, and with it, of the rationality
and the dignity of man.

II. Note On Schwarzschild’s Book On Marx (1965)
Some years after I wrote this book, Leopold Schwarzschild’s
book on Marx, The Red Prussian (translated by Margaret Wing:
London 1948) became known to me. There is no doubt in my mind
that Schwarzschild looks at Marx with unsympathetic and even
hostile eyes, and that he often paints him in the darkest possible
colours. But even though the book may be not always fair, it
contains documentary evidence, especially from the Marx-Engels
correspondence, which shows that Marx was less of a

humanitarian, and less of a lover of freedom, than he is made to
appear in my book. Schwarzschild describes him as a man who
saw in ‘the proletariat’ mainly an instrument for his own personal
ambition. Though this may put the matter more harshly than the
evidence warrants, it must be admitted that the evidence itself is
shattering.
1

I am deeply indebted to Dr. William W. Hartley’s incisive criticism which
not only helped me to improve chapter 24 of this book (especially page 231) but
also induced me to make important changes in the present addendum.
2
See for example ‘On the Sources of Knowledge and of Ignorance’, now
the Introduction to my Conjectures and Refutations and, more especially,
Chapter 10 of that book; also, of course, my The Logic of Scientific Discovery.
3
For a description and criticism of authoritarian (or non-fallibilist) theories
of knowledge see especially sections v, vi, and x, ff., of the Introduction to my
Conjectures and Refutations.
4
See W. V. Quine, Word and Object, 1959, p. 23.
5
See my Introduction, my Preface to the Second Edition, and the second
paragraph of vol. I, p. 202.

Index Of Names
Achilles, i, 327 f.
Acton, Lord, i, 137; ii, 302 f., 364.
Adam, J., i, 42, 83, 97, 141, 149, 206, 209, 212-14, 220 f., 223-5,
228 f., 236, 240, 242-6, 254, 257, 262 f., 273, 275 f., 282 f.,
299, 301, 315; ii, 283.
Adeimantus, i, 258, 262 f.
Adler, A., ii, 100, 325, 352.
Aeschines, i, 304.
Agassi, J., i, page x.
Agrippa, Mencnius, i, 294; ii, 305.
Alcibiades, i, 154, 191-3, 281 f., 296, 303.
Alcidamas, i, 70, 95, 114, 152, 185, 236, 261, 278, 294; ii, 282.
Alcmaeon, i, 79, 173, 242, 254, 294.
Alexander, S., ii, 305.
Alexander the Great, i, 236, 278 f.; ii, 2, 22, 50.
Al-Gazzâli, ii, 363.
Anaximander, i, 189, 204-6, 211, 300f.
Ancillon, ii, 43.
Anderson, E. N., ii, 53-5, 306, 309, 312-14.

Anderson, Maxwell, i, 336.
Angleus Silesius, see Scheffler, J.
Antiphon the Orator, of Rhamnus, i, 256, 296.
Antiphon the Sophist, of Athens, i, 69, 74, 95, 233, 236, 240, 256,
278, 294, 299.
Antisthenes, i, 95, 129, 152-4, 185, 194, 237, 241, 276-9, 282, 298,
311; ii, 21, 283, 292, 299-301.
Anytus, i, 192-4, 268.
Apollo, i, 328.
Aquinas, see Thomas.
Archelaus, i, 233.
Archimedes, i, 167; ii, 283.
Archytas, i, 196, 319.
Aristophanes, i, 182, 185, 218, 256, 307 f., 310.
Aristotle, i, 10, 12, 16, 26, 28-31, 33, 38, 43, 70, 91 f., 96, 102,
112, 114, 180, 205, 207-9, 211-19, 222, 228 f., 231, 235-7, 240
f., 248 f., 253, 255 f., 258, 260 f., 268, 273 f., 277 f., 280, 283,
294-6, 299 f., 308, 311, 314, 320 f.; ii, 1-18, 21, 26 f., 30, 36,
40, 50, 69, 75, 221, 281, 283-9, 292, 294 f., 299-303, 305, 309,
311, 316, 324, 359.
Aristoxenus, i, 300.
Armstrong, H. E., ii, 304.
Arndt, E. M., ii, 312.
Aspasia, i, 255.
‘Athenian Stranger’, The, i, 331.
Augustine, Saint, i, 221.
Augustus, Emperor, i, 298; ii, 353.
Bacon, Francis, ii, 16, 248, 297, 362, 37.8.
Badian, E., i, 237, 279.
Bakunin, M. A., ii, 328.
Banse, E., ii, 70, 316.
Barker, Sir Ernest, i, 104, 114 f., 236, 240, 246 f., 259, 261-3, 273,
282.
Earth, K., i, 235; ii, 272 f., 360, 365.
Bartley, W. W., i, page x; ii, 369.
Bavink, B., ii, 304.
Beethoven, L. van, i, 334; ii, 210 f.
Bellamy, A., ii, 337.
Benda, J., ii, 393.
Bcntham, J., ii, 237.

Bergson, H., i, 202, 294, 314; ii, 62, 229, 258, 305, 307, 315 f.,
361.
Berkeley, G., ii, 301, 363.
Bernard of Clairvaux, ii, 353.
Bernays, P., ii, 290.
Bernstein, A., ii, 339.
Best, W., ii, 75, 316.
Bevan, E., ii, 303.
Bias, i, 13; ii, 306.
Bismarck, O., von, ii, 58.
Blanc, L., i, 241; ii, 321.
Bluehcr, H., ii, 359.
Bodin, Jean, i, 121.
Boehme, J., ii, 353.
Bohr, N., ii, 357.
Borel, E., i, 252.
Bosanquet, B., ii, 79.
Bowra, Sir C. M., i, 216.
Bradford, the Bishop of, i, 203, 292.
Bradley, F. H., i, 232.
Broadhead, H. D., i, 279.
Bruno, Giordano, ii, 42.
Bryson, i, 252.
Buckle, H. T., ii, 364.
Burke, E., i, Motto, 112, 260; ii, 35, 60, 136, 226, 305, 308 f., 333.
Burnet, J., i, 66, 190, 204-7, 210, 214-16, 233, 235, 240, 267, 273,
294, 300 f., 304-9, 311-13.
Burns, E., i, 220, 241; ii, 318, 332.
Bury, R. G., i, 218, 331, 339, 341.
Butler, Samuel, i, Motto, 136, 268, 317.
Bywater, Ingram, i, 206, 301.
Caesar, ii, 128, 265.
Caird, E., ii, 8, 286, 306, 316.
Callicles, i, 116-18, 184, 262, 303.
Callippus, i, 136, 268.
Campbell Smith, M., see Smith.
Capek, K., ii, 312.
Carlyle, ii, 329.
Carnap, i, 216, 234, 274; ii, 290 f., 294-6, 308, 316, 352, 357, 359,
362.
Carneades, i, 118, 263, 315.

Carruthers, J., i, 291; ii, 321.
Carus, P., ii, 326, 359.
Cassirer, E., i, 270, 276; ii, 309, 312, 359 f.
Catlin, G. E. G., i, 30, 238 f., 256 f., 292, 316.
Charephon, i, 193, 304, 310.
Chairon, i, 268.
Chaplin, Charlie, ii, 308.
Charicles, i, 268.
Charles, V., ii, 128.
Charmides, i, 19, 191-3, 303, 310.
Cherniss, H., i, 222, 268.
Chiapelli, A., i, 321.
Chion, i, 136.
Christ, Jesus, i, 88, 104, 117; ii, 24, 257, 272 f., 360, 365.
Cicero, i, 263, 278 f., 300.
Clausewitz, K.., von, ii, 67.
Clearchus, i, 136.
Clenias, i, 224.
Codrus, i, 19, 153, 208, 282.
Cohen, M. R., ii, 293, 295.
Cole, G. D. H., ii, 325, 329, 345 f.
Comte, A., i, 35, 40, 207 f., 220 f.; ii, 87, 144, 197, 212, 298.
Constantine, Emperor, ii, 24, 302 f.
Cope, G.,i, 203, 292.
Copernicus, N., i, 319.
Coriscus, i, 268.
Cornford, F. M., i, 210, 212 f., 215, 223 f., 240 f., 250 f., 253, 270
f., 279; ii, 283.
Costelloe, B. F. C., ii, 281.
Grantor, i, 224; ii, 319.
Critias, i, 19, 142, 184, 187, 191-3, 195, 208, 259, 268, 272 f., 294,
299 f; 303 f., 310 f., 317, 324-6; ii, 24, 302, 318.
Grossman, R. H. S., i, 87, 130 f., 133, 139, 169, 216, 246 f., 267,
270, 304) 313, 315; ii, 16, 292 f., 295.
Cyrus the Younger, i, 226, 305.
Dalziel, Margaret, i, page x.
Damon, i, 229 f.
Daniel (Prophet), i, 272.
Darwin, Charles, i, 314, 317; ii, 40, 212, 244.
Davies,J. L., i, 247, 258, 271, 313.

Democritus, i, 12, 185 f., 206, 233, 276, 278 f., 294, 299, 320; ii,
22, 26 f., 54, 299, 304.
Demos, i, 311.
Demosthenes, ii, 281.
Descartes, R., ii, 54, 301, 362, 378.
Dickens, C., i, 100 f., 258, 268; ii, 341, Diels, H., i, 204, 206 f.,
213, 230, 233, 235, 254, 259, 273, 279, 294, 299-301, 303,
319, 321; ii, 387.
Dilthey, W., ii, 358.
Dio, i, 136, 154, 200, 282, 316 f.
Diogenes, the Cynic, i, 241, 278 f., 282; ii, 299.
Diogenes Laertius, i, 241, 279.
Dionysius (the Elder), i, 18, 43, 283, 297, 304, 311.
Dionysius (the Younger), i, 44, 136, 283, 303, 316.
Dirac, P. A. M., ii, 379.
Djilas, ii, 334.
Dudley, D. R., i, 277.
Duemmler, F., i, 277.
Duhem, P., ii, 361, 364.
Duns Scotus, ii, 353.
Durkheim, E., i, 175.
Eastman, M., i, 210, 284; ii, 320.
Eckhart, Master, ii, 353.
Eddington, A. S., i, 237; ii, 244, 259, 361, 364.
Einstein, A., ii, 20, 27, 165, 220 f., 266, 289, 325, 360, 364.
Eisler, R., i, 204, an, 227, 233, 242, 254, 256, 272, 282, 321; ii,
365.
Empedocles, i, 208 f., 214, 217 f.; ii, 285.
Empiricus, Sextus, see Sextus.
Engels, F., i, 220; ii, 83, 100, 102, 105, in, 118, 120, 154, 159-62,
164, 171 f., 187 f., 202 f., 205, 223, 318, 320 f., 325, 327-9,
332, 338 f., 341 f., 346, 349 f., 360, 396.
England, E. B., i, 104, 216, 222 f., 259.
Epictetus, i, 279; ii, 301.
Epicurus, ii, 304.
Epimenides, the Cretan, ii, 354.
Estabrooks, G. H., i, 317.
Euclid, i, 249, 251, 267, 319 f., 322.
Euken, W., ii, 346.
Euphacus, i, 268.
Eurastus, i, 268.

Euripides, i, 70, 95, 185, 236, 259, 278 f., 299.
Euthyphro, i, 197, 315.
Ewer, T. K., i, page x.
Ewing, A. C., i, 246.
Falkenberg, R., ii, 304.
Faraday, M., ii, 244.
Farber, M., ii, 298.
Farrington, B., i, 217.
Ferdinand of Austria, ii, 309.
Feuerbach, A., ii, 201, 313, 321 f.
Fichte, I. H., ii, 316.
Fichte, J. G., i, 247, 280; ii, 21, 53-5, 58, 70 f., 81, 305, 307, 312 f.,
316, 318, 353.
Field, G. C., i, 88, 208, 210, 214 f., 236, 247, 260, 273, 277, 281,
307, 311, 313; ii, 281, 300.
Findlay, J. N., ii, 356.
Fisher, H. A. L., ii, 197, 350, 366 f.
File, W., i, 217, 313.
Fitzgerald, E., ii, 339.
Ford, H., ii, 341.
Foster, M. B., ii, 311, 365.
Fourier, C., ii, 194, 350.
Fowler, H., i, 326, 328.
Francis I of Austria, ii, 309.
Frederick II of Prussia, i, 276, 304.
Frederick William III of Prussia, ii, 31 f., 34 f., 41, 43, 49, 55, 58,
306 f., 312.
Freud, S., i, 295, 313; ii, 100, 299, 352.
Freyer, A., ii, 64-6, 70, 315 f.
Fried, M., ii, 308.
Friedlein, G., i, 320.
Fries, J. F., ii, 27, 308.
Fritz, Kurt von, i, 277.
Galiani, Abbe, ii, 350 f.
Galileo, i, 319; ii, 42, 252.
Gandhi, ii, 272.
Gans, E., ii, 304.
Card, Roger Martin du, i, 157, 164, 284; ii, 376.
Gassendi, P., ii, 304.
Gauss, C. F., ii, 16.
Gazzali, Al-, see Al-Gazzali.

Gedye, G. E. R., ii, 337.
Geffken, J., ii, 302.
Gilbert, Sir W. S., ii, 265.
Ginsberg, M., ii, 323.
Glaucon, i, 97-9, 116-18, 150 f., 166, 228, 241, 254, 258, 262 f.,
272, 313, 315.
Glockner, H. von, ii, 304.
Gobineau, Count J. A., i, 9, 203.
Goedel, K., ii, 355 f., 374.
Goethe, ii, 307, 312 f.
Gogarten, F., ii, 76.
Gombrich, E. H., i, page x, 253; ii, 311, 325.
Gomperz, H., ii, 287, 362, 364.
Gomperz, T., i, 88, 187, 214, 224, 228, 236, 246, 257, 259, 276,
299, 301 f., 304 f.; ii, 2, 4, 281, 284-6.
Gorgias, i, 70, 114, 152, 185, 261, 276, 278.
Green, T. H., i, 260; ii, 79.
Greenidge, ii, 283.
Grenfell, B. P., and Hunt, A. S., i, 229.
Grote, G., i, 80, 88, 204, 208, 211, 216, 226, 242, 246 f., 255, 268,
273, 275, 297, 303, 305, 315, 330; ii, 281-3, 288, 300 f.
Haeckel, E., ii, 61, 314.
Haiser, F., ii, 67 f., 315 f.
Haldane, Elizabeth S., ii, 301.
Harris, W. T., ii, 286.
Harvey, W., ii, 252.
Hastie, W., i, 247.
Hatfield, H.
Stafford, ii, 304.
Hayek, F. A. von, i, page x, 207 f., 285 f., 315; ii, 298, 315, 323,
331, 336, 348, 383.
Heath, T., i, 249, 251 f.
Hecker, J. F., ii, 325, 333.
Hegel, F., i, 10, 17, 40, 107, 121, 144, 161, 203, 207, 221, 232, 238
f., 246 f., 297, 314, 325; ii, 1, 7-9, 16, 21 f., 27-82, 87, 91, 99,
102-4, 107, 111, 115, 133, 197 f., 206, 211 f., 214, 216, 221,
223-6, 247, 249, 257, 271, 274 f., 286 f., 304-320, 325, 327,
330, 336, 339 f., 350, 352 f., 359, 365 f., 393-5.
Hegemann, W., i, 298, 304; ii, 312 f., 317.
Heidegger, M., ii, 76-8, 297, 316 f.
Heiden. K., ii, 28, 393.

Heine, H., ii, 109, 326, 332.
Hempel, C. G., ii, 364.
Heraclidcs, i, 136, 316.
Heraclitus, i, 10-21, 24, 28, 38 f., 42, 55 f., 60, 73, 80, 83, 124,
148, 172 f., 189, 203-9, 214, 216, 232 f., 294 f., 301, 312 f.; ii,
27, 30, 36 f., 40, 47, 67, 102, 212, 275 f., 305 f., 325, 353.
Herder, J. G. i, 232, 247, 293; ii, 52, 305, 312.
Hermias, i, 268.
Hermocrates, i, 311.
Hermodorus, i, 13.
Herodotus, i, 95, 173, 185, 222, 233, 255, 294, 299.
Hesiod, i, ii f., 15, 37 f., 55, 153, 188, 204, 209, 211, 218 f., 228,
235, 254, 271, 295.
Hilbert, D., ii, 290.
Hippias, i, 70, 95, 233, 236, 278, 294, 333.
Hippodamus, i, 173, 211, 294 f.
Hobbes, T., i, 118, 142, 315; ii, 287, 289, 291, 301.
Hobhouse, L. T., ii, 79.
Homer, i, ii, 204, 226, 228 f., 280, 295, 312, 327; ii, 272, 275.
Hook, S., ii, 339.
Humboldt, W., von, ii, 54, 395.
Hume, D., i, 230, 261; ii, 38, 54, 213, 248, 295, 297, 363.
Hunt, A. S., see Grenfell, B. P.
Husserl, E.,i, 216; ii, 16, 76, 292, 309, 316, 323, 354, 362.
Hutton, H. D., ii, 298.
Huxley, A., i, 121; ii, 357 f.
Huxley, T. H., ii, 284, 322.
Hyndman, H. H., ii, 341.
Inge, W. R.,i, 316; ii, 351.
Isocratcs, i, 136, 153 f., 224; ii, 281, 299.
Jamblichus, ii, 302.
Jaspers, K., ii, 76, 78, 317.
Jeans, J., ii, 244, 358, 364.
Jesus, see Christ.
Joad, C. E. M., i, 87, 246.
John, Saint (the Evangelist), ii, 301.
Johnson, S., ii, 389.
Jowett, B., i, 261, 295.
Julian the Apostate, ii, 23, 302.
Jung, E., ii, 70, 316.
Justinian, Emperor, ii, 24, 302.

Kafka, F., ii, 245, 359.
Kant, L, i, 1, 73, 102, 139, 152, 202, 232, 237, 246 f., 256 f., 270,
276, 284, 293, 325, 334, 336; ii, 15, 21, 33, 38-41, 44 f., 52-4,
65, 78, 107, 213 f., 224, 229, 238, 247-50, 297, 299, 307-9,
312-14, 332, 352 f., 357, 359 f., 362, 382, 385, 393-5.
Kapp, von, ii, 163.
Katz, D., ii, 323.
Kaufmann, E., ii, 70, 316.
Kautsky, K., i, 230; ii, 323, 341.
Keeling, S. V., i, 314.
Keller, A., ii, 241, 358.
Kelsen, H., i, 217, 284, 313.
Kepler, J., i, 319; ii, 27, 377.
Kierkegaard, S., ii, 200 f., 273, 275, 306, 350 f., 365 f.
King, C. C., ii, 389.
KirchhofF, i, 299.
Kirk, G. S., i, 312.
Kleist, H. von, ii, 382.
Kolnai, A.,i, 230; ii, 71 f., 78, 315-17, 359.
Kraft, J., i, 269; ii, 292, 316, 336.
Kraus, K., ii, 334, 337.
Krieck, E., ii, 72, 316, Krohn, A., i, 257.
Kuratowski, K., i, 232.
Lagarde, P. de (Boetticher), ii, 76.
Laird, J., ii, 354.
Lakatos, I., ii, 294.
Lamarck, J. B., ii, 212.
Lamb, W. R. M., i, 335.
Langford, E. H., ii, 354.
Larsen, H., i, page x.
Lassalle, F. von, i, 203, 208.
Laurat, L., ii, 332, 339-42, 351.
Lauwerys, J. A., i, 325.
Lenin, V. I., i, 160, 167; ii, 83, 102, 108 f., 118, 166, 179, 188,
318, 320 f., 325, 328, 338, 341, 343 f., 350, 360.
Lenz, F., ii, 70, 316.
Leptines, i, 136.
Lessing, G. E., ii, 312.
Leucippus, i, 206.
Levinson, R. B., i, 323-42.
Lewis, Sinclair, i, 316.

Liddell, H. G., and Scott, R., i, 327, 341.
Lindsay, A. D. (Lord), i, 221, 271, 275-7, 288.
Lippmann, W., i, 203; ii, Motto, 81, 128, 330.
Livy, i, 294.
Locke, J., ii, 54, 287, 295, 301, 304, 362.
Loewe, A., ii, 351.
Loewenberg, J., ii, 286, 304 f., 307.
Loyola, I, Saint, ii, 257, 361.
Lucian, i, 205.
Lucretius, ii, 304.
Ludendorff, General von, ii, 70, 316.
Lummer, O., ii, 364.
Luther, Martin, ii, 201, 351.
Lutoslawski, W., i, 312.
Lybyer, A. H., i, 227.
Lycophron, i, 70, 76, 95, 114-17, 152, 185, 236, 241, 261 f., 273,
278, 294, 315; ii, 282, 309.
Lycurgus, i, 256.
Lysander, i, 184, 304.
Lysias, i, 296.
Mabbott, J. D., i, page x, 211.
Macaulay, T. B. (Lord), i, 264.
Machiavelli,N.,i, 221, 230; ii, 322, 324.
Maclver, R. M., i, 216.
Macleod, W. C., i, 230.
Macmurray, J., ii, 243 f., 269, 273, 358, 365.
MacTaggart, John MacT. E., i, 314; ii, 29, 358.
Magee, B., i, page x, 210, 286; ii, 321, 334.
Malebranche, ii, 299.
Malinowski, ii, 321.
Malthus, T. R.,i, 314.
Mannheim, H., i, 288.
Mannheim, K., ii, 213, 336, 351 f.
Marinelli, W., i, 252.
Martensen, Bishop, ii, 365.
Martin du Card, R., see Gard.
Marx, K., i, pages viii, ix, 9 f., 38-40, 164, 203, 216, 220 f., 241; ii.
i, 61, 81-9, 93 f., 98-128, 130, 133-136, 138-50, 152-5, 159,
164, 166, 190, 193 f., 196-205, 207 f., 211 f., 214, 224, 241,
252-5, 274, 315, 317-20, 321-3, 325-51, 360, 396.
Masaryk, T. G., ii, 51, 312, 318.

Matthew, Saint, ii, 358.
Meltetus, i, 268.
Mendelssohn, M., ii, 307, 360.
Menger, A., ii, 321.
Monger, K., i, 234; ii, 290, 324.
Metz, R., ii, 79.
Meyer, E., i, 180 f., 207 f., 214, 255, 265, 268, 283, 295-301, 303
f., 316; ii, 68, 316, 364.
Miksch, L., ii, 346 f.
Milford, P., i, 298.
Mill, James, i, 264; ii, 348.
Mill, J. S., i, 29, 35, 40, 216, 221, 246, 263 f., 316; ii, 54, 87-9, 913, 97, 99, 101, 104, 106, 197, 212, 298, 320, 322-4.
Miller, D. W., i, page x.
Mitchell, A., ii, 307.
Moeller van den Bruck, A., ii, 76.
Mohammed, ii, 256 f.
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat, Baron de, ii, 305.
Moore, G. E., ii, 295.
Morgenthau, H. J., i, 260 f.
Morrow, G. R., i, 225, 247.
Mueller, A., ii, 54, 79.
Muirhead, J. H., ii, 281.
Mure, G. R. G., ii, 289.
Nagel, E., ii, 293, 295.
Napoleon I, i, 63 f.; ii, 51, 54, 58, 312.
Napoleon III, ii, 206.
Nelson, Leonard, i, 232, 265, 269.
Nestle, W., i, 205.
Neurath, O., i, 325.
Newton, Isaac, i, 319; ii, 27, 252, 266, 362 f., 377.
Nicolovius, ii, 313.
Nietzsche, F. von, i, 230, 284; ii, 381 f.
North (translator of Plutarch’s Lives), ii, 283.
Oedipus, i, 22.
Offenbach. J., ii, 32.
Ogden, C. K., ii, 364.
Old Oligarch, i, 187, 195, 198, 222, 278, 294, 299, 304, 325; ii, 50.
Oppenheimer, F., i, 230.
Osborn, H. F., ii, 285.
Paine, Thomas, i, 73.

Pareto, V., i, 38, 199, 223, 315 f.; ii, 23, 56, 58, 138, 278, 302, 313,
315, 324.
Paris, i, 326.
Parkes, H. B., ii, 158, 183, 186, 339, 341, 344, 348-51.
Parmenides, i, 12, 14, 21, 28 f., 21 i f., 214, 236, 275 f., 301, 312,
314; ii, 287, 353.
Pascal, B., ii, 54.
Pasteur, L., ii, 252.
Patroclus, i, 327.
Paul, C., and Paul, E., ii, 318.
Paul, Saint, ii, 301.
Perdiccas III, i, 268.
Pericles, i, 7, 42, 95 f., 102, 105, 181, 185-7, 189, 197, 199, 203,
221, 228, 230, 255, 258, 299, 339-41; ii, 22.
Phaedrus, i, 327.
Phaleas of Chalcedon, i, 173, 294.
Philip II of Macedonia, ii, 2.
Philo Judaeus, i, 205.
Philodemus, i, 278.
Pilate (Pontius), ii, 272, 369.
Pindar, i, 69, 77, 233, 236, 241, 262.
Plato, i, pages viii, ix, x, 7, 10-12, 14, 16-22, 24-57, 59, 67-70, 7284, 86-109, 115-21, 123, 125-8, 130-157, 161, 164-7, 169-71,
180, 184, 186 f., 191 f., 194-200, 202-31, 233, 235 f., 240-59,
261-3, 265-284, 292 f., 295 f, 298-317, 319-343; ii, 1-7, 9-13,
15, 21, 23 f., 26 f., 30 f., 35-7, 40 f., 44-6, 50-52, 61, 66, 69, 81
f., 92, 116, 118, 133, 162, 197, 211 f., 227, 229, 236, 245, 249
f., 267, 277, 281-9, 299-302, 305 f., 310, 312 f., 318 f., 322,
324, 326-8, 334, 353, 357, 359-61.
Plutarch, i, 243, 248, 250, 254, 296; ii, 283.
Poincare, H., i, 237; ii, 361.
Polanyi, K., i, 216; ii, 323.
Polybius, ii, 302.
Popper, K. R., i, 3, 205, 210 f., 216, 227, 232, 234, 237, 264, 266,
274, 285 f., 291, 293, 300, 319-21, 323-43, 330-5; ii, 212, 260,
262, 289, 291, 295-8, 308, 320 f., 323 f., 326 f., 335 f., 351 f.,
358, 361-4, 369, 373 f., 376, 378, 394.
Popper-Lynkeus, J., i, 294; ii, 321.
Pound, Roscoe, i, 210, 284, 286.
Pringsheim, E., ii, 364.
Proclus, i, 249, 320.

Prodicus, i, 228.
Protagoras, i, 57, 61, 65-7, 76 f., 142, 185, 189 f., 228, 233, 235,
241, 255, 262, 294.
Proudhon, ii, 123.
Pseudo-Plutarch, i, 236.
Pseudo-Xenophon, see Old Oligarch.
Pyrilampes, i, 311.
Pythagoras, i, 15, 129, 188, 248 f., 301; ii, 353, 360.
Quetelet, I. A.J., ii, 345.
Quine, W. van O., i, 232; ii, 376.
Rader, M. M., i, 300; ii, 316.
Ramsey, F. P., ii, 9.
Raven, J. E., ii, 312.
Rayleigh, Lord, ii, 364.
Renan, E., i, 230; ii, 314.
Ricardo, D., ii, 170-2, 344, 346, 349.
Richards, I. A., ii, 364.
Rickert, H., ii, 364.
Ritter, C., i, 322.
Robespierre, M., ii, 109.
Robinson, R., i, -page x, 332, 339, 342, 345.
Rodman, H. M., ii, 394.
Rogers, A. K., i, 210, 307.
Rosenberg, A., ii, 71, 73, 316.
Rosenkranz, K. von, ii, 304.
Ross, W. D., ii, 282, 288, 292, 301.
Rousseau, J. J., i, 40, 121, 221, 223, 246, 257, 293; ii, 37, 40, 44 f.,
52, 55, 74, 81, 91, 109, 305, 309, 312.
Russell, B. (Lord), i, 131, 233, 274; ii, 55, 128, 212, 247, 293, 297,
304, 330 f., 355, 359.
Russell, L. J., i, 234 f.; ii, 328, 357, 383.
Riistow, A., i, 204.
Ryazanow, D., ii, 318.
Sachs, E., i, 321.
Salomon, E. von, ii, 317, 359.
Sanazzaro, Jacob, i, 221, 246.
Sandys, J. E., i, 300.
Santayana, G., i, 316.
Schallmeyer, W., i, 317; ii, 61, 315.
Scheffler, J. (Angelus Silesius), ii, 359.
Scheler, M., ii, 70, 76, 213, 316.

Schelling, F. W., ii, 21, 28, 53, 305, 353.
Schiller, F. C. S., i, 334, ii, 305, 313, 395.
Schlegel, F., ii, 305.
Schleiermacher, F. E. D., ii, 305.
Schlick, M., ii, 294, 298.
Schneeberger, G., ii, 316.
Schopenhauer, A., ii, 21, 27 f, 32-5, 38, 41, 54, 61, 63, 70, 77, 79
f., 82, 261, 275, 299, 304, 306-8, 313, 315, 31?, 362, 365 f.,
381, 393.
Schwarzschild, L., ii, 396.
Schwegler, F. C. A., ii, 33 f., 306.
Scott, R., see Liddell, H. G.
Scott, R. F., Capt., ii, 74.
Sextus Empiricus, ii, 363.
Shakespeare, W., i, 246, 294; ii, 32, 283.
Shaw, G. B., i, 246, 294; ii, 62, 232 f., SIS.
Shelley, P. B., i, 153.
Sherrington, C., i, 233, 258 f.
Shorey, P., i, 327, 334-6, 338.
Sibree, J., ii, 286, 311.
Sidgwick, H., ii, 361.
Simkhovitch, V. G., i, 298.
Simkin, C. G. F., i, page x, 211, 285; ii, 348, 350.
Simmel, G., i, 216.
Simplicius, i, 214, 247; ii, 299.
Smith, A., ii, 170, 187, 346, 349.
Smith, J.,ii, 305.
Smith, M. Campbell, i, 270, 276.
Socrates, i, 18, 29 f., 34, 42, 52, 61, 66 f., 69, 72, 76, 95, 97-9, 104106, 109, 116 f., 128-34, 137-9, 143 f., 150-2, 154-6, 166, 185,
188-97, 199 f., 210, 214 f., 221 f., 229, 233, 235, 237, 241,
254-6, 259, 262 f., 266-8, 272 f., 277-9, 282 f., 296, 299, 30014, 317, 321 f., 330-2; ii, 21-3, 42, 224, 227, 236, 244, 276,
283, 301, 303, 313, 353, 361.
Solon, i, 19, 60, 208.
Sophocles, i, 185, 299.
Spearman, D., i, 343.
Spencer, H., i, 35.
Spengler, O., i, 55, 231 f., 280; ii, 71, 76, 197, 316 f.
Speusippus, i, 217, 235; ii, 5, 36, 285.
Spinoza, B. de, i, 260; ii, 54, 305, 307, 353.

Stafford Hatfield, H., see Hatfield.
Stapel, W., ii, 72, 76, 316.
Stebbing, L. S., ii, 358.
Stern, G. B., i, 284.
Stevenson, C. L., i, 247.
Stewart, J. A., i, 292.
Stirling, J. H., ii, 27, 29, 33 f., 306.
Strabo, i, 268; ii, 302.
Tarn, W. W., i, 224, 236, 278 f., 281, 299.
Tarski, A., i, 216, 234, 273 f.; ii, 290, 294, 356, 362, 369 f., 373 f.,
376.
Taylor, A. E., i, 153, 204, 210, 215, 224 f., 244 f., 262, 282, 284,
303-8, 311 f., 330; ii, 283.
Teutames, i, 13.
Thales, i, 204.
Theaetetus, i, 321 f.
Theages, i, 154.
Themis, i, 253 f.
Themistocles, i, 178.
Theophrastus, i, 212, 214; ii, 299.
Theopompus, ii, 299, 301.
Theramenes, i, 303.
Thomas Aquinas, i, 237, 316; ii, 237.
Thrasybulus, i, 192.
Thrasymachus, i, 69, 105 f., 116-18, 184, 262 f., 303.
Thucydides, i, 95, 178-81, 183-5, 187, 192, 221, 228, 255 f., 283,
295 f., 299.
Timochares, i, 254.
Tocqueville, A. de, i, 159, 286.
Townsend, J., ii, 200, 300.
Toynbee, A. J., i, 221, 226 f., 230-2, 268, 294 f., 298; ii, 23, 251-8,
301-3, 358, 360 f., 366 f.
Treitschke, H. von, ii, 65, 76, 315.
Twain, M., i, 270.
Ueberweg, F., i, 205, 321.
Urey, H. C., ii, 374.
Vaughan, C. E.,i, 247, 258, 271, 313; ii, 311.
Veblen, T., i, 231.
Vico, G., i, 221; ii, 306.
Vierkandt, A., i, 216.
Viner, J., i, page x, 314; ii, 321, 344, 347 f.

Voltaire, i, 293, 304; ii, 205.
Wagner, Richard, i, 230; ii, 32, an.
Waismann, F., ii, 299.
Wallace, W., ii, 304.
Wallas, G., i, 203.
Webb, L., ii, 358.
Webb, Sidney and Beatrice, i, 210; ii, 320.
Weber, Alfred, ii, 351.
Weber, Max, i, 216; ii, 97, 292, 324, 364.
Weber (translator of Vico), ii, 300.
Wells, H. G., i, 258; ii, 351, 357.
White, Morton, G., ii, 364.
Whitchead, A. N., ii, 231, 247-50, 305, 506, 359.
Wiener, N., i, 232.
Wilde, O.. ii, 388.
Wilson, Woodrow, ii, 50 f., 318.
Winckelmann. J. J., ii, 312.
Wing, M., ii, 396.
Winspear, A. D., i, 217, 267, 315.
Wisdom, J., ii, 351.
Wittgenstein, L., i, 205, 234; ii, 9, id, 20, 246, 287, 293 f., 296-9,
316, 351, 353, 355 f., 358 f., 366.
Xenocrates, i, 268.
Xenophanes, i, 15, 189, 214, 235, 295, 312; ii, 285, 387.
Xenophon (for Pseudo-Xenophon, see Old Oligarch), i, 241, 273,
277, 283, 303, 305-7, 311; ii, 283.
‘Younger Socrates’, The, i, 329.
Zcller, E., i, 204 f., 217; ii, 7, 281 f.,, 284-6.
Zeno, i, 276.
Ziegler, H. O., ii, 79, 317.
Zimmern, Sir Arthur, ii, 62, 312, 314-16, 318.
Zinovief. G. C., ii, 331.
Zinsser, H., i, 298; ii, 25, 270, 304.

Index Of Subjects
Italicized page-numbers indicate that the reference is of special
importance. The letter t, which stands for ‘term’, placed after a
page number, indicates that the meaning of the term in question is
discussed. There is an Index of Platonic Passages at the end of the
first volume.
Abolitionism, evidence for its existence in Plato’s time, see
slavery.
absolutism, ii, 377, 385, 391.
Abstract society, i, 174t, 175, 176;
(see also concrete group).
abstraction, ii, 245-6.
Academy, Plato’s, i, 18, 42, 136, 235, 248, 253, 268, 316-17.
Aestheticism, i, 165t, 167, 292, ii, 302;
of Plato, i, 78, 145, 165;
(see also ‘canvas-cleaning’).
aesthetics, i, 230, 292, ii, 210, 211, 302, 365-6;
and ethics, i, 65, 165, 2 f)2, ii, 210, 557;
and mysticism, ii, 243, 246.
alogos, i, 320.
altruism, i, 100-2, ii, 275, 277;
(see also individualism; egoism).
anamnesis, i, 219t.
anarchism, ii, 328, 334.
antinomies, Kant’s, ii, 38-9, 308;
(see also paradox).
archaism, ii, 251t, 360, 361.
arguing, argument, ii, 13, 16-17, 225, 238, 242, 247, 249, 252, 289.
aristocracy, Plato on, i, 222, 283.
Aristotle, ii, 1-7, ch. 11 (I), 281, 284-285, 301;
critic of Plato, ii, 2, 3, 281;
cynicism of, i, 273, 296;
influence of, i, 236, ii, 4, 7, 27, 283;
Plato’s influence on, i, 217, ii, 11, 282, 285.
arithmetic, see number; irrational numbers; geometry; Plato, the
mathematician.
arrest of change, see change, Plato’s theory of arrest of.
arrested societies, i, 55, 224, 232, 268;
(see also Sparta).
astrology, i, 210, 244 (cp. ii, 279).

atheism, Plato on, i, 331.
Athens, i, 46, 177-83, ch. 10(II), 228, 256, 325 f., 334;
bias against, i, 228, 296-7, ch. 10, 11, 15;
School of Hellas, i, 181, 186;
Athenian movement against slavery, see slavery;
Society of Friends of Laconia, i, 179, 180, 183, 187.
atomism, atoms, i, 250, 251, ii, 324;
and hedonism, ii, 304;
and individualism, ii, 314, 315.
autarky, see self-sufficiency.
authoritarian theory of knowledge, ii, 373, 377-8.
authoritarianism, i, 66, 71, 72, 129, 159, ii, 284;
medieval, ii, 25, 30;
of Plato, i, 134, 136;
Socrates on, i, 129-30.
autochthonous, see myth of the earthborn.
Babbitt (S. Lewis), i, 316.
biological theory of the state, see organic.
Black Death, ii, 25.
Brave New World (A. Huxley), i, 121, ii, 357 (cp. ii, 227).
breakdown of societies, see closed society.
breeding, Plato’s theory of, i, 51-3, 82-3, 228, 245, 276, 281, 283,
331, 336-8.
(see also class mixture; racialism). ‘bucket theory of mind’, ii,
214t, 260, 361.
(see also ‘searchlight theory of science’).
budgeting, i, 285, ii, 132.
‘canvas-cleaning’, i, 166t-167, 200, 292, 328, 336; ii, 94.
capitalism, i, 287; ii, 111t-115, 120, 135, 153-4, 183, 186, 191,
330, 335;
state capitalism, ii, 334, 335t;
unrestrained capitalism, ii, 117t, 122, 124, 169, 327t, 335;
disappearance of, ii, 125, 140-1, 335, 339.
Carthage, i, 297-8.
categorical apparatus, ii, 214t, 220.
categorical imperative, see golden rule.
causal explanation, see explanation.
causality, ii, 262-3, 363;
(see also explanation).
certainty, quest for, ii, 375.
change, i, 314, ii, 212;

Heraclitus’ theory of, i, 12, 14, 204, 205;
(see also flux);
arrest of, Plato’s theory of, i, 21, ch. 3(III), 37, 38, 86, 146,
218, ch. 4, n. 3, 268, 318;
and rest, Plato on, 36, 37, ch. 4 (I), 276, 317;
(see also decay; flux);
problem of start of, i, 39, 81, 219, 220;
Aristotle on, ii, 4, 5, 7, 285, 286;
Hegel on, i, 314-15;
(see also dialectics, Hegel).
checks and balances, theory of, i, 122t, 263-4, ii, 162;
(see also democratic control).
Chosen People, doctrine of the, i, 8-9, 203, 300, ii, 22, 252-3;
(see also tribalism, Jewish; historicism, Jewish).
Christ, ii, 272-3, 357;
interpretation of His own teaching, ii, 24;
and worldly success, ii, 257, 272-3.
Christianity, i, 65, 102, 104, 117, 235, ii, 243, 251, 256, 357, 361;
history of, ii, 21-6, ch. 11 (III), 301-4;
humanitarian, see ethics, Christian;
totalitarian and tribal, ii, 76, 242, 300, 303, 310;
vs. historicism, ii, 272-3, 279;
vs. slavery and private property, i, 241, ii, 254, 301;
Marx’s influence on modern Christianity, ii, 201, 255.
Christians in the Class Struggle (G. Cope), i, 203, 292, ch. 9, n.
12;
(see also liquidation).
civilization, i, page v, i, 317, ii, 194;
(see also western civilization);
the cross of civilization, ii, 245;
(see also strain of civilization).
clarity, ii, 218, 239, 296, 307, 357;
(see also language).
class, classes, historicist theory of society, i, 38-41;
Aristotle on, ii, 282-4.—Marx on, i, 40, ii, 111;
class consciousness, ii, 112, ch. 16(I), 115-16;
class dictatorship, ii, 120, 122, 157, 162, 328;
(see also capitalism);
class interests, ii, 112, 114;
class struggle, ii, 111-13, ch. 16(II), 116, 120;
middle class, ii, 146-7;

Plato’s theory of, i, 46-7, 87, 106, 258;
class distinction, i, 46, 49, 90, 148, 225;
mixture of classes, i, 49, 82, 141, 225, 272;
(see also breeding);
class privileges, i, 51, 86, 90, 119, 227, 259, 267;
(see also Sparta);
ruling class, i, 49, 54, ch. 4 (IV).
class war, i, 38, ii, 116;
(see also human cattle; human watch-dog; working
class; slavery).
classless society, i, 46, ii, 137-9, 333-4, ch. 18 (II), n. 4.
closed society, the, i, I, 57t, 108, 173, 190, 195, 200, 202t, 232,
294, 295, ii, 22, 75, 94;
(see also arrested societies);
breakdown of, i, 177, 198, 232, 294t, 295.
‘clue to history’, the, ii, 269, 274, ch. 25 (IV);
(see also philosophy of history).
collectivism, i, 9t, 100-1, 203, 258t, ii, 57, 81, 226, 246, 322, 326;
(see also egoism; holism; utilitarianism, collectivist);
Hegel, ii, 45, 57, 69-70, 99, 310, 315;
Mannheim, ii, 336;
Marx, ii, 99, 319;
Plato, i, 80, 102-3, 106, 108, 324 f.
collectivist morality, i, 107-8;
(see also ethics, totalitarian).
collectivist planning, i, 2, 285, ii, 357.
commerce, i, 176, 177, 295; (cp. i, 184, 187, 283).
common meals, i, 48, 259.
communism, Athenian, i, 315;
early Christian, i, 241, ii, 254, 301;
Marx, i, 241, ii, 254, 321;
Plato, i, 48, 102, 104, 221, 259, 315;
(see however plutocracy);
Pythagorean maxim, i, 104, 241, 259;
Russian, ii, 83, 360.
communists, communist parties, ii, 144, 152, 158, 164-5, 190-2,
339, 340, 341.
community, ii, 98;
(see also collectivism; communism; concrete group).
competition, ii, 330;
under capitalism, see economics.

compromise, i, 159, ii, 143, 155, 163, 191, 236.
concrete group, i, 175;
(see also abstract society). ‘conspiracy theory of society’, ii,
94t, 95, 101, 133, 330.
Constitution of Athens (‘ Old Oligarch’), i, 187, 322.
contradictions, i, 205, ii, 39, 249-50;
(see also antinomies; logic; paradox).
control, see democratic control; institutions; checks and balances.
conventionalism, critical or ethical, see dualism of facts and
decisions;
naive, i, 14-15, 60t;
religious, of Plato, i, 77-8, 141-2;
in science, i, 237t, ii, 259, 260, 364.
correspondence with the facts, ii, 369-95.
corruption, cosmic law of, i, 19, 20, 35, 40, 209, 210, 217, 218,
222-3;
(see also decay).
cosmology, Ionian, i, 204;
Heraclitus, i, 12-13, 204-5;
Plato, i, 19-20, 26-8, 211-13;
(see also i, 248-53, ch. 6, n. 9; ideas; geometry).
cosmopolitanism in Greece, i, 185, 236, 216, 278, 279, 281, 299;
(see also unity of mankind).
credit, see money.
Credo (K. Earth), i, 235, ii, 272.
Crete, i, 228.
criterion, criteria, ii, 371-5, 382.
critical conventionalism or critical dualism, see dualism of facts
and decisions.
critical rationalism, see rationalism, criticism, critical method,
critical discussion, i, page v, 129, 186, 222, ii, 238, 239, 360,
376, 378-81, 386-7, 390;
(see also arguing; rationalism);
and education, i, 130, 135, ii, 209, 284;
Plato on, i, 53, 86, 229, 267, 268, 270, 275, 276-7, 298, ii,
310;
Socrates on, i, 129, 130;
and politics, see politics;
rational and scientific, ii, 218, 221, 222, 238, 284, 322;
rational tradition of, i, 188, 300.
crucial experiment, ii, 12, 266, 364.

Crusoe, see Robinson.
Cultural frontiers of Western Europe, ii, 353.
cynics, i, 236, 277, 279, 282, n. 22.
dark ages, i, 200, ii, 303.
Darwinism, i, 317, ii, 61.
decay, Plato’s theory of, i, 19, 20, 36, 37, 55, 76, 217;
(see also change; corruption; cosmology);
arrest of, i, 20-1, ch. 3 (II), 37.
decisions, moral, i, 61, 62, 64, ii, 232-234, 240, 380-1, 383;
(see also dualism of facts and decisions; responsibility).
Decline of the West (O. Spengler), i, 55, 231-2, ch. 4, n. 45.
definition, i, 31-4, ch. 3 (VI), ii, 10, 11, 16, 21;
(see also methodological essentialism);
implicit, ii, 296t.
demand, political, see language, of political demands and
proposals.
demarcation between metaphysics and science, problem of, ii, 293,
297t-8 (cp. ii, 260; see also refutability).
democracies, smaller, see smaller democracies.
democracy, i, 4, 124-51, 127, 189, ii, 151-2, 160-11, ch. 19 (V);
Athenian, i, 178-83;
Marx and Marxists on, ii, 120, 122, 157-9, 161, 163, 164,
341, 343;
‘Old Oligarch’ on, i, 187-8;
Pericles on, i, 42, 95, 186;
Plato on, i, 40-3, 123, 221, 254-6, ch. 6, n. 14;
Socrates on, i, 305.
and critical rationalism, i, 130;
and party politics, ii, 162-3;
and scientific development, ii, 322.
democratic control, i, 123-5, ch. 7 (II), 127, ii, 127, 129, 131, 132,
139, 143, 151, 331;
(see also checks and balances; interventionism).
description, scientific and historical, ii, 261, ch. 25 (I).
despair of reason, ii, 231, 256, 279.
determinism, ii, 85, 210, 305, 321;
sociological and historical, ii, 87, 101, 208, 211;
(see also sociologism; historicism).
dialectics;
of Hegel, ii, 28, 371-39, 42, 309, 340;
Jewish, ii, 301;

Marx, ii, 88, 102, 138, 319, 320, 334, 340;
Plato, i, 133, 274-5, ii, 11.
dictator, theory of the benevolent, i, 159-60, 264, 316, ch. 10, n. 69
(cp. i. 123).
dictatorship, see tyranny.
Dike, i, 254.
division of labour, i, 173;
Marx on, ii, 319;
Plato on, i, 78, 90, 226, ii, 319;
modern opposition to, ii, 241, 358.
dogmatism, ii, 239, 249;
reinforced, ii, 40, 215t-216, 241, 297, 298.
domination and submission, Hegel’s theory of, ii, 8t, 276, 286-7.
Dorian conquest, the, see nomads.
dualism in Plato’s philosophy, ch. 5 (IX), 84-5, 103-4, 279.
dualism of body and mind, ii, 102-3, 107-10, 333-4.
dualism of facts and decisions or critical dualism, i, 60t-1, 73, 211,
234-5, ch. 5 (III), n. 5, 239, 334; ii, 233, 278-9, 383-5, 391-3,
394-5 (cp. ii, 209).
economics, i, 173, ii, 29, 96, 97, 174-5, 196, 335, 339, 348;
(see also money);
capital, accumulation, concentration, centralization of, ii, 106,
136, 146, 147, 153, 166-8, ch. 20 (I), 180, 183, 185-6,
194, 329, 338t;
competition, ii, 140, 146-7, 166, 167, 169, 174, 175, 183,
330, 346;
falling rates of profits, ii, 183-5, ch. 20 (V), 196, 349, 350;
human metabolism, ii, 103-4, 106, 107, 112, 133, 137 (cp. ii,
333-4);
industrial reserve army, ii, 168, 175, 180, 186, 330;
law of increase of misery and wealth, ii, 123, 136, 146, 148,
155, 156, 159, 168, 169, 178, 179, 189, 190, 330;
means of production, ii, 135, 326;
production relations and conditions, ii, 106, 113, 194, 326, ch.
15, n. 13, 329, 330, 333;
surplus population and wages, ii, 176, 179, ch. 20 (III), 346;
theory of value, ii, 170-7, ch. 20 (II), 329, 335, 344-5 n. 10;
trade cycles, ii, 166, 168, 179-82, ch. 20 (IV), 194-6, 330,
348;
two kinds of capital, ii, 184, 348-9, ch. 20, n. 33;
(see also money; division of labour; capitalism; Marx).

economism, ii, 104t, 107.
education, i, 135, ii, 209, 275-8, 283-284, ch. 11, n. 6;
new principle of, ii, 276;
new principle of liberal education in universities, ii, 284;
Aristotle’s influence on, ii, 283;
Aristotle on, ii, 3, 4;
Frederick William III on, ii, 34-5;
English, i, 316, ii, 284;
Greek, i, 53, 130-1;
Marx on, ii, 141;
Plato’s influence on, i, 54, 148 (cp. i, 227);
Plato on, i, 47, 49, 51-2, 133-4, ch. 7 (V), 142, 147, 221, 227,
228, 258, 267-269, 328 f.; ii, 227;
Socrates on, i, 129-30, 133;
state control of, i, 103, 111, 130-1;
totalitarian, i, 54, 103.
egoism, i, 100, 101, 104;
(see also collectivism; utilitarianism, collectivist).
Egypt, i, 224, 231, 275, ii, 319, 325.
elections, general, i, 124-5, ii, 129, 151, 160, 331;
(see also paradox, of democracy; of sovereignty).
empiricism, ii, 213-14, 224, 352, 362, 378.
ends and means, i, 161, 286-7, ch. 9, n. 6.
Engels, change of front and new tactics, ii, 159, 160, 162, 188;
dogmatism of, ii, 327, 332, 342;
on man’s emancipation, ii, 105.
engineering, i, 68, 163, ii, 85, 222, 263, 324;
social, see social engineering.
England, ii, 140, 182, 331;
(see also education);
Haeckel on, ii, 314;
Hegel on, ii, 57, 64, 313, 314, 330 (cp. ii, 34);
Marx, Engels and Lenin on, ii, 135-6, 154-5, 187-8, 328, 338,
340, 341.
Enlightenment, the, i, 333 f.; ii, 303.
entelechy, ii, 6t, 286.
equalitarianism, i, 69, 70, 95, ch. 6 (IV), 235, ch. 5, n. 6, 284, ch. 9,
n. 2;
in Greece, i, 46, 69, 70, 95, 186, 236, 261, 278, 299;
(see also slavery, Athenian movement for abolition of);

Plato’s standard objection to and Rousseau’s reply, i, 256-7,
ch. 6, n. 20 (cp. ii, 44);
Kant’s, i, 256;
and rationalism, ii, 234-6.
equality, ii, 234, 278, 357;
arithmetical and geometrical, i, 248, 250, 262;
before the law, i, 89, 96, 254, 255, ii. 234.
Eros, i, 211, 218.
escapism, i, 238, 314, ii, 139, 243, 256-7, 360, 361.
esotericism, ii, 241, 299.
essence, i, 29, 31, ii, 5, 6, 7, 8, 13;
(see
also
essentialism;
definition,
methodological
essentialism);
Aristotle, ii, 6, 9-12, 288, 289, 362;
Hegel, ii, 36;
Heidegger, ii, 77;
Marx, ii, 107, 177, 319, 326, 328, 329, 346, 347;
Plato, i, 28-30, 74, 75, 200;
Socrates, i, 29-30;
(see however ii, 301).
essentialism, ii, 9-21;
(see also methodological essentialism).
ethics, morals, morality, equalitarian, humanitarian and Christian,
i, 65, 66, 73, 335, ch. 5, n. 6, 257, 263, ii, 151, 200;
totalitarian collectivist and tribalist, i, 101-3, 107-8, 112-113,
139, 256, 258, 325, 331, 339 f.; ii, 44, 52, 65-76, 310,
314;
historicist, ii, 202t, 205-6, 255;
(see also historicism, and ethics);
and aesthetics, i, 65, 165, 292, ii, 210, 357;
and politics, i, 113, 139, 260;
and religion, see religion;
and science, ii, 233, 238, 243-4;
‘scientific’, i, 237, ch. 5, n. 18;
see also dualism of facts and decisions; naturalism;
positivism; relativism; futurism; utilitarianism; ends and
means; pain and pleasure.
evolutionism, i, 40, ii, 322 (cp. i, 314; see also progressivism);
fascist, ii, 61-2;
of Hegel, i, 314, ii, 36-7;
of Speusippus and Aristotle, ii, 5, 285, ch. 11, n. 11.

existentialism, ii, 76-7, 380-1.
exogamy, rules of, ii, 89t.
experiment, ii, 218, 220, 233, 238;
crucial, ii, 12, 266, 364;
social, i, 162, 163, 167;
(see also planning; social engineering; social science).
explanation, ii, 210 f., 362-4, ch. 25, n. 7;
causal, i, 210 f., ii, 262-3, 362-4;
historical, ii, 263t, 266, 364.
exploitation, ii, 122-4, 168, 173, 178, 184, 329;
colonial, Marxist hypothesis of, ii, 187-9, ch. 20 (VI), 336,
338.
faith in reason, i, 185, ii, 231t, 233, 243, 246, 258.
fallibilism, ii, 374, 375, 377.
falsifiability, see refutability.
fame and fate, Heraclitean and Hegelian philosophy of, i, 171, ii,
8t, 71-2, 276-7.
fascism, ii, 30-1, 60-78;
(see also nationalism; racialism);
attitude of Marxist parties towards, 162-4, ch. 19 (VI), 336-7,
343-4.
feudalism (used in the metaphorical sense of landed
proprietorship), ii, 3, 30, 113, 135, 345.
Fichte, the father of German nationalism, ii, 53-4, 71;
and Kant, ii, 54, 313, ch. 12, n. 58.
fire, Heraclitus’ theory of, i, 14, 15, 73, 206-7, ch. 2, n. 7, 212.
flux, Heraclitus’ theory of, i, 12, 189, 204-7, ch. 2, n. 2, 208, 211,
214, 217, 300, 301, 314, ii, 36, 249.
forms, see ideas.
freedom, ii, 126-9, ch. 17 (V);
limitations of, i, 110-11, 247, 131, ii, 44, 331;
(see also paradox of freedom);
Hegel on, ii, 56, 72;
Marx on, ii, 101, 103, 105, 207;
(see also freedom, merely formal);
Spinoza on, ii, 305;
merely formal, ii, 57, 124t, 127, 173, 199, 314, ch. 12, n. 62,
330, 341, 346 (cp. ii, 207);
of criticism, ii, 238 (cp. ii, 220, 222);
of thought and speech, Plato against, i, 267, 268, 270, 275;
(see also state, state censorship; education);

Hegel on, ii, 42-3, 305, 310.
French Revolution, the, i, 17, 203, 208, 294, 334; ii, 30, 52, 53, 55,
87, 207;
Heine on, ii, 109.
funeral oration of Pericles, i, 186, 255, ch. 6, n. 16.
futurism, moral; ii, 206t-208, 271, 274;
aesthetic, i, 230.
general will, ii, 52, 81.
geometrical theory of the world, i, 248-53, 320, 343.
geometry, Plato’s, i, 248-53, ch. 6, n. 9, 267, 319-20;
vs. arithmetic, i, 248.
German idealism, ii, 28, 32, 134, 353;
inferiority feelings, ii, 64, 312, 313, ch, 12, n. 57;
nationalism, ii, 49-58, ch. 12(III), 311, 314;
(see also imperialism);
nihilism, ii, 78;
romanticism, ii, 21, 60, 302, 317.
Germany, the other, ii, 78, 307.
‘Glauconic edict’, the, i, 150t, 151.
God,
(see monotheism);
Antisthenes on, i, 276, 278;
Aristotle on, ii, 285;
Plato on, i, 213, 276, ii, 283;
will of, and historicism, i, 8, 24.
Golden Age, i, 11, 19, 21, 25, 43, 204, 209, 210, 218.
‘golden rule’, Kant’s, i, 102, 256;
justification of, ii, 238, 386.
good, the, i, 237-8, ii, 296;
Aristotle on, ii, 5, 285;
Moore on, ii, 295-6 , 410;
Plato’s idea of, i, 145-6, ch. 8 (IV), 217, 274-5, ch. 8, n. 32, ii,
357;
Whitehead on, ii, 248.
Gorgias, see Plato, Republic, compared with Gorgias.
government, i, 124;
(see also state);
Marx on, ii, 120;
Plato on, i, 222, 261.
Great Generation, the, i, 70, 185t, 189, 194, 196, 199, 278, 299,
332; ii, 22, 26, 30.

great men, genius, i, 17, 231, ii, 32, 67-8, 73, 228, 276 (cp. i, page
v).
Great Year or Great Cycle, i, 19, 206t, 207, 208-19, ch. 3, n.6, 219,
220.
Greeks, i, 171-2, 294, 341.
growth of knowledge, ii, 375, 376, 377, 383.
happiness, ii, 237;
Hegel on, ii, 73;
Plato on, i, 74, 169, 240.
harmony, i, 108, 197, 313.
‘hauteur’, Platonic, i, 334.
Heaven on earth, i, 165, ii, 237, 333, 358.
heavy water, ii, 374-5.
hedonism, see utilitarianism.
Hegel, ii, 28, 38, 42, 54, 59-60, 79, 307;
cynicism of, ii, 306, 310 (cp. ii, 56, 72);
‘dialectical twists’, ii, 401, 42, 44, 49, 74, 310;
style, ii, 28, 32, 44, 287;
on Kant, ii, 38, 44-5, 309;
on Plato, ii, 31, 310;
philosophy of identity, ii, 40t, 308-9, 393, 395;
of nature, ii, 27-8;
policies of, ii, 32-5;
The Secret of Hegel (J. H. Stirling), ii, 29;
father of New Tribalism, 30-4, 56, 61-78, ch. 12 (V), 311,
314;
influenced by Aristotle, ii, 7-8, 36, 286, 309;
by Burke, ii, 60, ch. 12 (IV), 308, 309;
by Heraclitus, i, 17, 203, ii, 36, 49;
other influences, ii, 305-6, ch. 12, n. 11.
Hegel’s influence, i, 238, 297, ii, 29-31, 79, 215, 247, 249, 307,
311, 314;
(see also Hegelianism; Marx);
Foster on, ii, 365-6, ch. 25, n. 19;
Kierkegaard on, ii, 275;
Schopenhauer on, ii, 32-3, 54, 63, 77-80;
(see also dialectics; truth; philosophy of history).
Hegelianism, ii, 29, 30, 31, 78-9, ch. 12 (VI), 208, 223, 226, 275,
356.
Heraclitus, i, 12, 189;
cosmology, 12-13, 204-5;

influence, i, 12, 203;
(see also Hegel);
natural philosophy, i, 14, 60, 206, ch. 2, n. 7.
Heredity, Plato’s theory of, see breeding, hero worship, heroism, ii,
67-70, 73-5, 270, 271, 276.
historical materialism, i, 38, ii, 105-6, ch. 15 (II).
historical prophecy, ii, 85, 87, 139, 141-2, 256, 260, 273, 361;
Marx’s, ii, 133, 136-7, ch. 18 (I), 329;
evaluation of, ii, 193-4, 197-8;
refutations of, ii, 109, 140, 154, 159, 183, 186, 191, 329, 336.
historicism, i, 2, 31-8, 21, 114-15, 260, ii, 125, 193, 322, 393, 395;
author’s attitude towards, i, 34;
and change, i, 14, 21 (cp. i, 314);
and determinism, ii, 32, 85;
and essentialism, i, 28, 216;
and ethics, ii, 279, 366-7;
(see also ethics, historicist);
as an outcome of oppression, i, i, 17, 203, 207, 300, ii, 122,
329;
and peace, i, 260, 290-1;
and psychologism, ii, 92;
and religion, i, 300, ii, 279;
and astrology, i, 210, 244;
and scientism, i, 286;
Aristotle, ii, 7;
Hegel, ii, 7, 37-8, ch. 12 (II), 47-8;
Heraclitus, i, 14-16;
Hesiod, i, 11;
Jaspers, ii, 78;
Lenin, ii, 320;
Mannheim, ii, 352;
Marx, i, 164, ii, 86, 106, 193, 202, 319, 322, 337;
Mill, ii, 87, 92, 322;
Morgenthau, i, 260;
Plato, i, 19, ai, 24-5, 55, 75, 78, 84;
Jewish, i, 17, 203, 207, 300;
(see also Chosen People);
Theistic, i, 8, ii, 271;
other modern forms, i, 221, ii, 241, 273-4, ch. 15, n. 4, p. 325
(Hecker).
historicist methodology, i, 21, 75.

historism, ii, 208t, 255-8, 361.
history, ii, 261, 264, 263, 270, 364;
of philosophy, ii, 54-5;
of political power, ii, 270, 278;
of science, ii, 107, 260, 262-3, 325, 362-3.
holism, i, 80t, 100;
(see also individuals and society; mysticism; intuitionism);
Hegel, ii, 69, 310, 315;
Heraclitus, i, 16;
Marx, ii, 130, 133;
Parmenides, i, 301, 314;
Plato, i, 48, 80-1, 100, 242t, 274-5, 279, 314;
Toynbee, ii, 258;
Wittgenstein, ii, 246, 359.
human cattle, i, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 53, 154, 226, 227t, 228.
human watchdog, i, 46, 51, 52, 149, 226, 227t, 241, 254.
humanism, ii, 258;
(see also faith in reason).
humanitarianism, i, 263, 329 f., 332 f.; ii, 198, 205-6, 234, 238,
258;
and rationalism, ii, 238-40.
hypothesis, i, 58, 239, ii, 12, 13, 221, 260, 262, 264, 284, 289, 299,
324, 363;
working, ii, 260;
auxiliary, ii, 266;
Marx’s auxiliary hypothesis of colonial exploitation, see
exploitation.
idealism, ii, 291, 325, 326, 352, 353, 366.
ideas, Plato’s, as fathers of sensible things, i, 211-15, ch. 3, n. 15,
219-220, 274;
(see also space, as mother of sensible things);
Platonic, non-Socratic, origin of Plato’s theory of, i, 21 o,
215;
(see also Pythagorean Table of Opposites; Socratic Problem);
‘problem of the third man’, i, 220;
stages in development of, i, 214-15, ch. 3, n. 26, 219-20;
as triangles, i, 253, 319 f.
(see also aesthetics);
Antisthenes’ attack on Plato’s theory, ii, 299;
Aristotle’s modification of Plato’s theory, ii, 5, 6, 286, 301;
Hegel’s distortion of Plato’s theory, ii, 40-1, 325.

identity, philosophy of, see Hegel.
identity of opposites, see unity of opposites.
ideology, ii, 134;
Marx on, ii, 108, 142, ch. 18 (IV), 254, 326;
total, ii, 213t, 216, 217.
imagination, ii, 233, 239-40, 246, 357.
impartiality, ii, 234-6, 238.
imperialism, i, 181, 182;
Athenian, 176-83, 278;
German, ii, 56, 65-6, 311, 314;
Roman, 181-2, 297;
of Alexander, ii, 50;
(see also i, 236, 278);
of Napoleon, ii, 55;
Plato against, i, 283, 302-3;
Marx and Marxists on, ii, 187-9, 336, 338.
increasing misery, law of, 166, 168, 178-90.
individualism, i, 100-2, ch. 6 (V), 190, 268, ch. 7, n. 23, ii, 91, 226,
245-6, 275;
(see also altruism).
individuals and society, i, 30, ii, 275-276;
Hegel on, ii, 43, 56, 72, 310, 315;
Kant on, ii, 357;
Mannheim on, ii, 213, 215;
Plato on, i, 76, 78-9, 102, 107-8, 139, 228, 279-80 (cp. i, 239,
ii, 210).
inductivism, ii, 291, 295;
Aristotle, i, 321, ii, 288-9;
Bacon, ii, 248;
Comte, ii, 298;
Mill, i, 264, ch. 7, n. 2.
Industrial Revolution, i, 17, ii, 121, 326.
infanticide, Plato’s defence of, i, 51, 228, 245, 295, 315, 338.
infinite regress, ii, 10, 17, 288.
Inquisition, the, i, 104, 200, ii, 24, 273;
Plato’s recommendation of, i, 195.
institutionalism, ii, 90t, 131, 132, 160-2;
and individualism, i, 268.
institutions, ii, 90;
international, i, 288-9;
political, i, 109, 121, 123, 125, ii, 130;

social, i, 23, 67, 125, ch. 7 (III), 759, 172, 173, 294, ii, 85, 50,
93, 94, 280, 322-4;
improvement and planning of social, i, 127, 163, ii, 143, 278;
for economic control, ii, 131, 193, 195;
for freedom of criticism, ii, 227, 238;
for scientific objectivity, ii, 218.
intellectual honesty, Socratic, i, 129, 190, 222, ii, 244, 283-4.
intellectualism, ii, 224t, 229, 352t.
international relations, international crime and peace, i, 107, 113,
161, 260, 288-91, ch. 9, n. 7, ii, 8, 258, 270-2, 278.
interpersonalism, ii, 226, 227;
(see also intersubjectivity).
interpretations, general, ii, 266t;
of history, i, 171, ii, 266, 267-8, ch. 25 (III), 303, 336, 337;
specific, ii, 266-71;
of the Russian Revolution, ii, 336;
of Heraclitus’ teaching, i, 204;
of Marx’s ‘social revolution’, ii, 152-6, ch. 19 (III), 339-41;
of Parmenides’ teaching, i, 214;
of Plato’s teaching, i, 54, 170-1, 246, 308, 331, ii, 267.
intersubjectivity, ii, 217t, 221;
(see also interpersonalism;
language).
interventionisrn, ii, 125t, ch. 17 (III), 130, 140, 143, 178-9, 182,
193, 330, 335;
two kinds of, ii, 131-2.
intuition, intuitionism, ii, 15-16, 288-289, 291, ch. 11, n. 44, 361;
(see also mysticism);
Aristotle, i, 314, ii, 10, 11, 289;
Bergson, ii, 361 (cp. ii, 307);
Hegel, ii, 309;
Heraclitus, i, 15;
Husserl, ii, 292;
Plato, i, 145, 274, ii, 11;
Spinoza, ii, 353.
Ionian school, the, see tradition, rational.
irrational, the, ii, 245, 357.
irrational numbers, i, 212, 248-53, 318, 319.
irrationalism, ii, 224, 227-9, 249;
author’s counter-attack on, 240-6, ch. 24 (IV);
as despair of reason, ii, 231, 256, 279;

two examples of, ii, 247-58, ch. 24 (V);
and idea of unity of mankind, see unity of mankind;
and love, ii, 235-7;
and mysticism, ii, 242;
and personalism, ii, 133;
and science, ii, 247;
of Toynbce, ii, 251-8, 360-1, 366;
of Whitehead, ii, 247-50, 359.
irrefutability, ii, 366;
(see also metaphysical).
Islands of the Blessed, i, 324.
isonomy, see equality, before the law.
Jesuitism, ii, 257.
Jews, historicism of, see historicism, Jewish;
intellectualism of, ii, 22, 301;
tribalism of, i, 17, 203, 279, ii, 22-3, 301;
(see also Chosen People).
justice, i, 89, ch. 6 (I), 113, 247, 256, 326;
Anaximander on, i, 301;
Aristotle on, i, 256;
Greek outlook, i, 91-8, ch. 6 (II), 254;
Hegel on, ii, 43;
humanitarian, i, 89, 91, 94;
(see also ethics; equality);
Kant on, i, 247, ch. 6, n. 4;
Marx on, ii, 123, 202;
Plato on, i, 89, 60, 94, 96, 37, 106, 107, 119, 221, 235, 248,
256, 263, ii, 5;
Plato on the power of faith in, i, 92-3;
Socrates on, i, 105, 117;
two sorts of, i, 91-2;
(see also ethics);
totalitarian, i, 90, 94, 107-8, 119.
‘kill and banish’ (Plato), i, 166, 326, 331, 336.
knowledge, see science; hypothesis; explanation;
and opinion, i, 82, 214, 236, ii, 12, 13, 287, 289, 305;
social aspects of, ii, 217-18;
sociology of, see sociologism;
theory of, ii, 213-14, 260, 262-3, 361-3.
know thyself: Socrates’ doctrine, ch. 7, n. 26; i, 228-30, 266, 269
(cp. i, 129, 146, 287);

Plato’s perversion, i, 132, 137;
see also sophocracy.
labour, ii, 131, 331;
(see also workers).
laissez fairs, see non-interventionism; in education, i, 130-1;
in ethics, ii, 237.
language, i, 32, 65, ii, 53, 235, 239, 307-8, 324, 361, 366;
(see also clarity);
of political demands or proposals, i, 109t, 112, 234-51, ii,
328, 357;
rationalization of, ii, 278, 357 (cp. ii, 361.
law, legislation, i, 110-11, ii, 121, 125, 170;
Hegel’s philosophy of, ii, 43, 45-6, 66-7, 309, 310;
Marx’s philosophy of, ii, 118, 123, 173, 329-32;
(see also legislation).
law, rule of, i, 166, 325.
laws, i, 57-9, ch. 5 (1), 233;
‘historical’, ii, 264, 268, 322;
natural, i, 57-9;
normative, i, 57-9, 61, 62, 65, 239;
sociological, i, 22, 62, 67, ch. 5 (IV), 236, ii, 93, 322, 323;
universal, ii, 262-5, 369.
leadership, see sovereignty; dictator; rulers;
Hegel on, ii, 73, 275;
(see also domination and submission; great men);
Plato’s ‘greatest principle’, i, 7, 103;
Plato’s theory of, i, 126-7, 135, 169, 269, 340 f.
League of Nations, i, 288.
‘Learned Elders of Zion’, ii, 95.
learning from our mistakes, ii, 376, 390.
legal framework, i, 286, ii, 131-3, ch. 17 (VII), 162, 331;
and economics, ii, 121.
legal system, ii, 118, 121.
legislation, see law;
interventionism; two types of, ii, 331.
liberalism, i, III, ii, 88, 284, 392-5;
(see also freedom);
Hegel’s attack on, ii, 309, 314;
Kant’s, i, 102, ii, 309;
Marx’s attitude towards, ii, 112, 319.
See also education.

‘liquidation’, Plato on, i, 166;
modern sense of, i, 292.
logic, i, 232, ii, 221, 291, 294, 301;
(see semantics, contradictions; paradoxes);
of class situation, ii, 113, 114, 117;
of freedom, i, 315t;
of norms, i, 234t;
(see also language, of political demands);
of the situation, ii, 571, 265t;
of power, i, 1, 237, 315t, 317, ii, 97.
‘lordly lie’, the, i, 138-40, ch. 8 (I), 150, 270-2, ii, 68.
love, ii, 235-7, 240, 244;
Jaspers on, ii, 317.
lying, i, 142-3, 183-4, 331, 336 f.
magic, i, 15, 57, 60, 148, 172, 206;
(see also taboos; numbers, Platonic).
maieutic, i, 322.
managerialism, i, 4;
(see also technocracy).
Maoris, i, 171.
Marx, i, page vi, ii, 81-8;
the economist, ii, 123, 173, 193, 323, 347;
the humanitarian, ii, 82, 207, 319;
the moralist, ii, 199, 211;
(see also historicist ethics; cp. i, 315, ii, 152);
the philosopher, ii, 133-4, ch. 17 (VIII);
the sociologist, ii, 82, 107, 193;
on bourgeois economists, 136, 332 (cp. ii, 173);
Capital, ii, 135-6, 166, 169, 253, 323, 332, ch. 18, n. 3;
10 Points programme, ii, 140-1, ch. 18 (III);
central idea of, 104, ch. 15 (I), 124;
collectivism, ii, 99, 200, 319;
utopianism, i, 164, ii, 333;
on criticism of his own work, ii, 327, 332;
rationalism, ii, 824, 252, 303;
irrationalism, ii, 143, 333;
naivete, ii, 321, 338;
prophecies, ii, 133, 135-7, ch. 18 (I), 329;
evaluation of prophecies, ii, 193-4, 197-8;
refutations and prophecies, ii, 109, 140, 154, 159, .183,
186, 191, 329, 336;

Hegel, disagreement with, ii, 99, 102, in, 325;
influenced by, ii, 82, 99, 103, 124, 128, 211, 314, 319,
327, 340, 350;
compared with Hegel, ii, 81, 224;
with Mill, ii, 87-8;
with Plato, i, 38, 40, 78, 168, ii, 118, 177;
influenced by French materialists, ii, 85, 102;
by French Revolution, ii, 87, 207;
by Vico, ii, 221;
influence on modern Christianity, ii, 200, 201.
Marxism, ii, 82-3;
as a method, ii, 84, 331;
as a religion, ii, 198, 255, 337;
revisionist, ii, 339;
tactics of, ii, 116, 144-5, ch. 18 (V), 158, 163-165, 189-92,
ch. 20 (VII) (cp. ii, 350);
two wings of, ii, 152-3 (cp. ii, 158-9);
‘Vulgar’, ii, 100t, 101, 111, 215, 325, 329, 330.
Marxists, ii, 141, 142, 342;
dogmatism of, ii, 182, 192, 216, 332;
irresponsibility of their leaders, ii, 145, 366.
materialism, ii, 229;
vs. idealism, ii, 326;
of Antiphon, i, 240;
French, ii, 85, 102;
Marxist, ii, 102, 326.
meaning, theory of, see positivism.
meaning of history, ii, 278-80, 364, 366.
medicine, principle of, ii, 276;
Plato on, i, 139, 270, 316, ii, 357.
medievalism, ii, 25, 241, 302, 303, 360-1.
meta-biology, i, 83, 246, ii, 62t, 315.
metabolism, human, see economics, metaphysical (non-scientific),
ii, 38, 108, 174, 177, 293, 297-9, 326.
metaphysics, ii, 38, 247-8, 290, 299.
methodological collectivism, ii, 323t;
essentialism, i, 31-21, ii, 17, 299-301, ch. 11, n. 54;
(see also essentialism);
individualism, ii, 91t, 324;
nominalism, i, 321, 109, 216, ii, 13-15, 18, 290, 291.
Middle Ages, i, 293, ii, 24-5, 116, 229, 241, 302;

two interpretations of, ii, 303, ch. 11, n. 6;
(see also medievalism).
misanthropy and misology, i, 283, 299, ii, 236.
misery, see increasing.
monarchy, ii, 2;
Hegel on, ii, 45-7, 311;
Plato on, i, 222, 283.
money, i, 316, ch. 10, n. 67, ii, 166, 181, 196, 345-7, 384.
monism, i, 731, ii, 366;
(see also naive monism);
Catlin’s, i, 237-9, ch. 5, n. 18.
monopoly, ii, 153, 172, 175, 178, 339.
monotheism, i, 276, 278, 279, ii, 22.
moral positivism, ii, 392, 393.
morals, morality, see ethics.
music, i, 230, ii, 210-11, 337;
anonymous Greek writer on, i, 229-30;
Plato on, i, 52-4, 229.
mysticism, i, 84, 202, 314, ch. 10, n. 59;
Greek, i, 314, ii, 353;
(see Pythagorean sect; Orphic sects);
medieval, ii, 229, 241, 353;
modern, ii, 241-2;
and art, ii, 243;
and historicism, ii, 279;
and science, 244-5;
Aristotle, i, 314, ii, 11, 289;
Bergson, i, 202, 314 (cp. ii, 361);
Hegel, ii, 309;
Heraclitus, i, 15, 205;
Marx, ii, 333;
Parmenides, i, 301, 314;
Plato, i, 56, 84, 314, ii, 353;
Wittgenstein, ii, 246, 359, 366.
Myth, ii, 245;
Empedocles’ myth of the Great Year, i, 208-9, ch. 3, n. 6;
(see also Great Year);
Great Myth of Sparta, i, 411;
Hesiod’s myth of chaos, i, 211;
of decay, i, 11, 188;
of metals in man, i, 219;

Plato’s myth of beast in men, i, 242, 313;
of blood and soil, i, 139-41, ch. 8 (II), ii, 61-2;
of decline and fall, i, 55-6, 232-3, ch. 4 (V), 244;
of earth born, i, 50, 140t, 209, 226, 270, 272, ii, 61;
of fall of man, i, 36, 37, 39, 81-3, ch. 5 (VIII), 141, 151-3,
198, 209, 219, 281, 315, ii, 282;
of metals in man, i, 83, 140, 209, 225, 212;
(see however i, 281; also racialism, of Plato);
of numbers, i, 82, 141, 148-53, 198, 209, 242-4, ch. 5, n. 39,
272, 281-2;
origin of species by degeneration, i, 37, 210, ii, 284-5;
Plato’s attitude towards his myths, i, 142-3, 272, 273;
interpretations of Plato’s myths, i, 54.
Myth of the Twentieth Century (A. Rosenberg), ii, 101.
naive monism, i, 591, 73, 172.
national state and national self-determination, principles of, i, 288,
ii, 50, 51, 318.
nationalism, i, 288, ii, 55, 63, 244, 306, 314, 361;
(see also Germans);
Fichte, ii, 53;
Hegel, ii, 58, 63-4, 69;
Herder, ii, 52.
naturalism, i, 68t, ch. 5 (V), 69-73, 95, 237-8, 299, 317, ii, 297;
barrenness of, i, 70, 78-9, 241, 262;
naive, i, 60t;
nationalist, ii, 51;
Aristotle, ii, 2, 282;
Kant, i, 73, 237;
(see however ii, 238, 353);
Marx, i, 241, ii, 325;
Plato, i, 70, ch. 5 (VI), 73, 74-8, 96;
Socrates on, i, 117, 262.
neo-Platonism, i, 210, 314, ii, 23, 301, 302, 353;
(see also Platonism).
New Deal, ii, 335.
‘New Economic Policy’, i, 166-7, ch. 13, n. 7, ii, 83, 320.
nihilism, i, 721, 184;
(see also positivism);
of Critias, i, 142, 303;
in Germany, ii, 78, 317;
in Greece, i, 184;

Plato on, i, 116, 118, 262.
‘noble lie’, i, 270;
see also ‘lordly lie’.
Nocturnal Council, i, 143, 195, 332.
nomads, hill shepherds (and Plato on the Dorian conquest), i, 50,
220, 225-7, ch. 4, n. 32, 230-1, 246, 293, 11, 283.
nominalism, ii, 290.
non-authoritarian theory of knowledge, ii, 369-96.
non-interventionism, ii, 88, 140, 146, 253, 327, 367;
(see also capitalism, unrestrained).
norms, normative laws, see laws; logic, of norms.
numbers, see irrational numbers; myth of numbers; geometry, vs.
arithmetic.
objectivity, ii, 217-18, 221, 238, 261, 268.
Oedipus, complex, i, 313;
fate a result of the prophecy (called ‘Oedipus effect’ in The
Poverty of Historicism’), i, 22 (cp. ii, 198).
oligarchy, Greek, i, 177-8, 187;
Plato on, i, 40t, 41, 222;
(see also i, 302-3; aristocracy; plutocracy);
Aristotle on, i, 296.
open society, the, i, 7, 173t, 174, 183, 189, 191, 197, 207, ch. 10
(VIII), 202t, 232, 294t, 303, ii, 22, 23, 30, 32, 49, 82, 94, 125,
162, 198, 200, 243, 361;
the rise of the, i, 174-5, ch. 10 (I).
operationalism, ii, 296.
oracular philosophy, ii, 21, 53, 229, 233, 243, 299t.
organic theory of society and state, i, 173-4, 294-5, 316;
oriental origin of, i, 242;
Plato, i, 22, 40-1, 56, 77, 79-81, ch. 5 (VII), 108, 138-9, 220,
242;
Hegel, ii, 31, 43, 45, 64;
Popper-Lynkeus’ attack on, i, 294, ch. 10, n. 7;
Renan, ii, 314;
Rousseau, ii, 52;
(see also national state).
oriental influences, i, 11, 204, 231, 233, 242, 272, 300, ii, 22.
origin of state, i, 115, 230-1.
Orphic sects, i, 188, 300-1, 313, ii, 285.
pain and pleasure, asymmetry of, i, 158, 235, 284-5, ch. 9, n. 2, ii,
237, 304.

paradoxes, ii, 354;
of democracy, i, 17, 121, 124, 125, 265;
of freedom, i, 123t-124, 265-6, ch. 7 (1), ns. 4, 6, ii, 131, 353;
Heraclitus on, i, 13;
Hegel on, ii, 44, 309, 310;
Kant on, ii, 44, 309;
(see also antinomies);
Marx on, ii, 124;
Plato on, i, 265;
Rousseau on, ii, 309;
of the liar, ii, 230, 353, ch. 24, n. 7;
forms of, ii, 3544, 355, ch. 24, n. 8;
of philosophy without presuppositions, ii, 230, 309;
of relativism, ii, 256, 351;
of sovereignty, i, 123-4, 266, ch. 7, n. 6;
of state planning, ii, 130;
of tolerance, i, 265-6;
of economic freedom, ii, 124, 179, 348.
paternal state, patriotism, i, 184t, ch. 10 (III), 272, 282, 299.
peace, see international relations.
Peloponnesian war, i, 178-80, 183, 192-3, 296.
personalism, i, 126, 268, ii, 132-3;
(see also institutionalism).
persuasion and force, Plato’s demand and Pareto’s advice, i, 118,
119, 140, 142, 195, 199, 263, 270-2, ch. 8, n. 10, 273, 316, ii,
23, 56, 58, 81, 138, 302, 318, ch. 13, n. 1.
pessimism, fascist, ii, 76-8;
of Hegel, ii, 75;
of Hesiod, i, 37-8, 188, 235;
of Schopenhauer, ii, 79.
Pharisaism, 491, 237, ii, 82.
phenomenology, i, 216, ii, 16, 292.
philosopher king, i, 132, 138-56, ch. 8 (V), 328, 331;
Kant on, i, 152;
Mill on, i, 263-4;
Plato’s self-portrait, 153-6, 282-4, ch. 8 (VIII).
philosopher’s stone, ii, 303, 334.
philosophy of history, Hegel, ii, 47-9, 69;
Herder, ii, 52;
Marx, ii, 101, 112;
Plato, i, 83, 209.

planning, ii, 130, ch. 17 (VI), 143, 194, 238;
(see also social engineering);
large scale, ii, 162, 212;
Hayek on, ii, 336.
Plato, i, page vi, 34, 155, 198-9;
aristocratic origin, i, 19, 27, 153, 208, 282;
youth and historical background, i, 18, 19, ch. 3 (I), 84, 171
ff.;
conversion by Socrates, i, 109, 191-2, 303;
founder of the Academy, i, 136-55, 300;
political activity, i, 18, 43-5, 136, 153, 282;
internal conflict, i, 109, 196-7, 199, 313, ch. 10 (VI), n. 59
(1);
advocates violence (‘ canvas cleaning’), 166, 195, 200, 327,
331 f., 336;
distorts Socrates’ teaching, i, 194-5, 305, ch. 10, ns. 55, 56;
as artist, i, 42, 165;
as mathematician, i, 248, 267, 319, 343;
as philosopher, i, 98, 246, 343, ch. 5, n. 45;
as social scientist, i, 35, 38, 54, 56, 70, 84, 101, 171, 198;
as teacher, i, 43, 268, 269;
Plato’s authoritarianism, i, 103, 134, 136;
hauteur, i, 328;
intuitionism, 145, 274, ii, 11, 227, 288-9;
irrationalism, i, 84, 141, ii, 236, 238;
misanthropy, i, 283, 299 (cp. i, 51, 139, 228, ii, 357);
mysticism, i, 314;
romanticism, i, 84, 165, 218;
self-portrait, see philosopher king;
the idealization of Plato, i, 87-8, 104, 141, 152, 223, 229, 244,
247, 271, 275, 276, 299, 323-43, ii, 26, 312;
his pupils becoming tyrants, i, 136-7, 268, 316-17;
influenced by Anaximander, i, 301;
by Herodotus, i, 222, 255;
by Hesiod, i, 11, 211, 218, 219;
by Heraclitus, i, 11, 16, 205, 208;
(see also flux);
by ‘Old Oligarch’, i, 300;
by Parmenides, i, 21, 28-9, 212, 301;
by Pythagorean sect, i, 83, 148, 196, 211-12, 246, 301, 319;
by Socrates, i, 29, 72, 109, 144, 197, 221, 240, 317;

compared with Socrates, i, 42, 128, 138, 143, 146, 154, 195,
268, 269, 301-2, 305, 313, ii, 313;
(see also self-sufficiency, Socratic vs. Platonic theory of;
Socratic problem);
on Antisthenes, i, 276-7, ch. 8, n. 47;
on Homer, i, 228-9, 280;
on Socrates, i, 222, 267, 273, 313;
and the Great Generation, i, 199;
his influence, i, 42, 54, 115, 127, 136, 199, 221, 228, 246,
273, 293, 313-14, 315, 316, ii, 52, 226, 245-6, 248, 249,
277, 306, 351;
contemporary, i, 236;
on medieval Europe, i, 200, 293, ii, 24;
(see also Hegel; Marx).
Platonism, Platonists, i, 112, 221, 236, 284, 342, ii, 246, 249-50;
(see also Neo-Platonism).
plutocracy, Plato on, i, 256, 267, 316.
point of view, ii, 259-68;
and hypothesis, ii, 260;
and interpretation, i, 171, 328, 331, ii, 267.
politics, i, 111, 113, 135, 189;
(see also institutions, political; ethics, and politics);
principle of, ii, 334;
Kant on, i, 139;
Marx on impotence of, ii, 119, 120, 322;
‘Old Oligarch’ on, i, 187-8;
Pericles on, i, 186;
Plato on, i, 138-9;
Socrates on, i, 130.
population increase, i, 245, 295.
positivism, ethical or juridicial, i, 68t, 71-2, 73, ii, 206, 392-5;
Catlin, i, 238-9, 257;
Hegel, ii, 8, 37, 41, 57, 206, 305-6, 308, 393-5;
Heraclitus, i, 16, 207;
Marx, ii, 206, 319;
Spinoza, ii, 305;
Toynbee, ii, 255, 360.
positivism, logical;
positivist theory of meaning, i, 234, ii, 20, 215, 293, ch. 11,
296-9, 351, 353, 355-6, 358, 363, 366, ns. 46, 47, 50, 52.
potentiality, Aristotle on, ii, 6, 286;

Bergson on, ii, 307;
Hegel on, ii, 8, 37, 3.07;
power, ii, 129;
(see also logic of power);
economic, ii, 124, 127;
political, ii, 127-9, ch. 17 (V), 162, 270;
Plato on misuse of, i, 259, 269;
state, ii, 130.
pragmatic rationalism, ii, 357t.
pragmatism, Marx’s, ii, 84, 86, 322.
precision, ii, 19, 20, 296.
prediction, i, 3, 260, 286, ii, 84-6, 260, 262-3.
prejudice, i, 129, 267, ii, 217, 220-3, 226, 318.
Principia Mathematica (B. Russell and A. N. Whitehead), ii, 301,
359.
Process and Reality (A. N. Whitehead), ii, 249.
productivity, ii, 106, 195, 241.
prognosis, ii, 262t-3.
progress, ii, 197-8, 279, 366;
in art, i, 230;
in metaphysics, ii, 247-8;
in science, ii, 12, 13, 39, 244, 247, 322, 352.
progressivism, ii, 186, 198, 322;
(see also evolutionism);
and ethics, i, 234;
and evolutionism, i, 40;
Hegel, ii, 47, 48;
Marx, ii, 197, 319;
Mill, ii, 88, 322;
Speusippus and Aristotle, ii, 5, 285;
Fisher’s attack on, ii, 197-8, 366.
proof, the doctrine of, ii, 13, 21, 291, 294.
propaganda, i, 330, 11, 143, 331;
Critias on, i, 273;
Plato on, i, 184, 298, 336 f.
(see also persuasion).
proposals, i, 631, 234, ii, 334;
(see also language, of proposals and demands).
protectionism, political, i, 111t, ch. 6 (VI), 115, 261, ii, 130, 330;
Aristotle and Burke against, i, 112, 261;
Hegel against, ii, 309;

Kant for, ii, 309;
Lycophron for, i, 114-115, ch. 6 (VII), 117, 261, ii, 309;
Plato’s presentation of, i, 69, 117-118, 262-3, ch. 6, n. 52.
psychoanalysis, i, 313, ii, 215, 216, 242, 267, 351, 352.
psychological naturalism, see naturalism.
psychologism, i, 841, 234, 290, ii, 88t, 90-9, 252;
and historicism, ii, 92;
and the myth of social contract, ii, 93-4, 106.
psychology, ii, 97-8.
public opinion,
Hegel on, ii, 68, 73, 305;
Heraclitus on, i, 13.
punishment, i, 261, 289-90;
Antiphon on, i, 69;
Hegel on, i, 246;
Heraclitus on, i, 14, 60;
Plato on, i, 138, 143, 195, 222, 261.
Pythagorean sect, i, 148, 188-9, 250, 301, ii, 325;
communism, i, 104, 241, 259;
mathematical programme, i, 248-9, 267, 319 f.;
natural philosophy, i, 308;
table of opposites, i, an, 212;
taboos, i, 148, 300.
quantum theory, ii, 85, 293, 364.
racialism, i, 9, 49, 231, 288, 317, ii, 61-2;
(see also breeding);
of Aristotle, ii, 284;
of Plato, i, 49, 51, 75, 82-3, 141, 149-52, 240, 242, 279, 331,
336-8, ch. 8, n. 50;
(see also i, 27; myth, of metals in man).
radicalism, i, 164, 167, 291-2, ch. 9, n. 12.
rationalism, ii, 224-6, ch. 24 (I), 229, 238-9, 243, 258, 352t;
critical, i, 32, ii, 230-2, 233, 237, 238, 253;
and the open society, i, i 73, 202;
and ethics, i, 287, ii, 232, 238-40;
and institutionalism, ii, 132, 238;
pragmatic, ii, 357t, ch. 24, n. 19;
true and pseudo, ii, 227, 229, 230;
uncritical, ii, 230-1, ch. 24 (II), 246, 357.
rationalist tradition within the borders of the Roman Empire, ii,
229, 253.

rationalization, ii, 238, 256, 278, 357, ch. 24, n. 19.
realism, ii, 280, 367t.
reason, reasonableness, see despair; faith; rationalism.
Reformation, the, ii, 30, 48.
refutability or falsifiability or testability, ii, 13, 222, 260, 263, 326,
332, 363t.
relativism, ethical, i, 16t, 369-96, ii, 202-3;
of Heraclitus, i, 16, 17;
of Marx, ii, 202-3, 319.
relativism, philosophical, see paradox; truth.
religion, i, 1, 9, 65, 66, 235, ii, 198, 242, 337, 341;
(see also Christianity; faith in reason; meta-biology);
Critias on, i, 142;
Plato on, i, 141-143, 213, 273, ii, 283;
Protagoras on, i, 235;
Greek, i, 27;
in the Roman Empire, ii, 23, 301, 302;
historicist, i, 207, 300;
and mysticism, ii, 243, 258;
and science, ii, 246, 359;
and tolerance, ii, 257, 258;
and war, ii, 244;
Marxism as, ii, 198, 225, 337;
‘is opium’, i, 273, ii, 302;
progressivist, ii, 198.
Renaissance, the, i, 221, 293, ii, 30, 151, 303.
resemblance, i, 27, notes 19 and 20 to ch. 3, ii, 301, note 54 (3) to
ch. 11.
responsibility, i, 4, 5, 49, 61, 65, 66, 113, 173, 200-1, ii, 24, 208,
237, 238, 242, 243.
return to the beasts, i, 201, 232, 317, 318, ch. 10, n. 71, ii, 242,
303, 317.
revolt against freedom, i, 188, 199, 315, 317, ii, 62, 72, 75, 81.
revolt against reason, i, 317, ii, 239.
revolt against science, ii, 57, 241-2;
(see also ii, 228).
revolutions, ii, 138-9, 349;
Heine on, ii, 709;
Marx on, ii, 109, 119, 146, 159, 326, 328, 340, 341;
Plato’s law of, i, 381, 44-5, 223;
‘in permanence’, ii, 335, 340, 350.

rhetorics, i, 129, 263, ii, 4.
Robinson Crusoe, ii, 219 20, 225.
romanticism, i, 168t, 218, 288, 292, ii, 237, 239, 241, 333-4, ch.
18, n. 4;
in education, ii, 275-7;
German, ii, 21, 60, 302, 317;
of Heraclitus, i, 17;
of Marx, ii, 130, 333, 337, ch. 18, n. 4;
medievalist, i, 16, 25, ii, 241-2, 302-3, 360-1;
of Plato, i, 84, 218;
Rousseau’s rural and pastoral, i, 246, 293.
Rome, Roman imperialism, i, 233, 297-8, ch. 10, n. 19, ii, 23, 3012.
rulers, i, 122, ii, 228, 257.
ruling, i, 120-1;
(see also philosopher king; democratic control; paradox, of
sovereignty).
Russia, ii, 108, 144, 326, 336, 349.
scepticism, i, 267, 287, ii, 369-95.
scholasticism, ii, 9, 20, 21, 222, 229;
(see also knowledge, theory of; hypothesis; explanation).
science, ii, 85, 242, 245, 283, 289;
‘bucket theory of mind’, 214t, 260, 361;
Crusonian, ii, 219-20;
definitions in, ii, 290, ch. 11, n. 39;
demarcation of, ii, 297-9, ch. 11, n. 51;
(see also refutability);
generalizing, ii, 263, 264, 364;
historical, ii, 264t;
natural and social, i, 33, 67, 216, 286, ii, 324;
‘searchlight theory of science’, ii, 260t-262;
(see also ‘bucket theory of mind’);
revealed, ii, 218-19;
Socratic approach to, i, 28-9, 131, 267;
(see also intellectual honesty);
and ethics, ii, 238;
and intuition, ii, 15-16, 292, 361;
and mysticism, ii, 243-6;
(see also revolt against science);
and religion, ii, 246, 359;
social, see social science.

scientific method, i, 3, 163, 285, 307, ii, 13, 82, 230, 233, 260, 289,
298, 324, 363;
(see also methodology);
and criticism, ii, 218;
and determinism, ii, 321;
and ethics, i, I, 69, 233, 285;
and piecemeal social engineering, i, 126, 291;
and situational logic, ii, 97;
public character and social aspect of, ii, 217-222.
scientism, i, 286t.
‘searchlight theory of science’, ii, 260t-262, 361;
(see also ‘bucket theory of mind’).
security, i, 111, 198, 201, 315, ii, 130, 132, 194.
self-evidence, ii, 291.
self-expression, ii, 239, 276, 278, 366.
self-sufficiency,
of the individual, Socratic vs. Platonic theory of, i, 76, 236,
240, 259;
of the state, Plato’s theory, i, 76, 87, 182;
Hegel on, ii, 310.
semantics (A. Tarski), i, 216, 234, 273-4, ch. 8, n. 23, ii, 290, 294,
353, 362.
sense of drift, see strain of civilization.
similarity, see resemblance.
simultaneity, ii, 20, 220.
slavery, i, 62, 65, 328-9, ii, 241, 278, 329, 340;
in closed societies, i, 295;
Athenian movement for abolition and the evidence for its
existence in Plato’s and Aristotle’s attacks on it, i, 43, 46,
47, 53, 70, 221, 222, 224-5 (ch. 4, ns. 18 and 29), 236, ch.
8, n. 48, 261, 278, 299, 3 16, 333-6, ii, 2-3, 282, 286-287;
Socrates’ attitude towards, i, 129;
Hegel on, see domination and submission;
Marx on, ii, 183, 187, 328.
smaller democracies, ii, 140-1, 189, 335, 336.
social contract, theory of, i, 115;
Critias, i, 273;
Lycophron, i, 76-7, 114, 261-2;
Plato, i, 76-7, 226, 263;
Rousseau, i, 246;
Barker on, i, 114-15, 261;

Hume and Nietzsche on, i, 230;
psycho-logistic methodological myth of, ii, 93-4, 106.
social democrats, ii, 144, 152, 159, 164-5, 189, 336, 339.
social dynamics, i, 16, 39, 83;
(see also social equilibrium).
social engineering, i, 22-4, ch. 3 (IV), 210t;
piecemeal, i, 158t, 159, 162, 167, 285, 286t, 291, ch. 9, n. 8,
ii, 125, 129, 130, 132, 142, 143, 194, 222, 237, 238, 367;
(see also social technology);
Utopian, i, 157t, 159-63, 167, 284, 285, 291, ii, 130;
(see also Utopianism; radicalism);
Marx against, i, 164, ii, 82-3, 115, 130, 142, 144-5, 198, 337;
Hayek on, i, 285.
social equilibrium, i, 46-9, ch. 4 (III), 52.
social experiment, see experiment.
social institutions, see institutions.
social science, i, 2, 5, ii, 9, 21, 216, 221-2, 256;
(see also laws, sociological);
backwardness of, i, 2, 33, ii, 256;
the task of, i, 22, ii, 95, 222.
social system, the, i, 167;
Marx’s theory of, ii, 118, 123, 326.
social technology, i, 211, 285, ii, 82, 87, 94, 143, 194, 222.
social zoology, i, 317, ch. 10, n. 71.
socialism, ii, 139, 193, 198, 333;
origin of, ii, 254;
(see also communism);
Marxist, ii, 83, 86, 108, 115, 140, 254, 360;
(see also Marx).
sociological laws, see laws, sociologism, sociology of knowledge,
socio-analysis and sociotherapy, ii, 208-16, 222-3, 242, 251-2,
267 (cp. i, 76).
sociology, see science, social; laws, social;
autonomy of, ii, 89-90, 106, 111-12;
of knowledge, see sociologism.
Socrates, i, 189-99, ch. 10 (V), 283, 313, 315, 332 f.;
see cosmopolitanism;
the democratic critic, i, 128, 188, 191, 194, 303;
the ethical reformer, i, 29, 193;
the individualist, i, 158, 196, 267, 301, 333;
the teacher, i, 130, 191-2, 222, 303, ii, 42, 276;

intellectual honesty, i, 128, 129, 190, 222, ii, 227, 244;
and the Thirty, i, 128, 193, 266, 303, 310;
trial and martyrdom, i, 193, 194, 268, 304, 305, 310;
his indifference to natural philosophy, i, 301, 308;
Aristophanes on, i, 308;
Aristotle on, i, 311;
Crossman on, i, 267;
and Plato, see Plato;
see Socratic problem;
his teaching, i, 105, 128-32, ch. 7 (IV), 185, 189-92, ii, 227,
301;
agnosticism, i, 128, 267, 308;
on democracy, i, 305;
on wisdom, i, 128-130, 308-9;
(see also soul; self-sufficiency; science).
Socratic problem, i, 210, 221, 299, 301, 306-13, 332 f., ch. 10, n.
56;
(see also ii, 313).
solar system, i, 260, 286.
Sophists, i, 57, 128, 131, 132, 142, 173, 263, 308.
sophocracy, i, 144t, 283.
soul, the, i, 301-2, ch. 10, n. 44;
Aristotle on, ii, 6-7;
Freud on, i, 313;
Plato on, i, 75, 78, 80, 81, 197, 212, 217, 240, 302, 313;
Pythagorean and Orphic sects on, i, 301, ii, 285.
sources of knowledge, ii, 378, 388, 389, 390.
sovereignty, i, 121-2;
(see also paradox, of sovereignty);
Hegel on, ii, 56;
Rousseau on, ii, 52 (cp. i, 125).
space as mother of sensible things, i, 211-13, 274;
(see also ideas, as fathers of sensible things).
Sparta, i, 177, 182, 184, 198, 227, 228, 259, 295, 298, 325 f.;
great myth of, i, 41.
standard of living, ii, 195;
(see also increasing misery).
state, i, 288, ii, 129, 328;
(see also protectionism, interventionism);
capitalism, ii, 193, 328, 334;
censorship, i, 53, 86, 132, 229, 267, 268, 275;

control of education, i, 103, in, 130, 131;
control of economics, i, 111, ii, 125-30;
interference, i, 110-11;
origin of the, i, 215, 230-1;
(see also organic theory of the state);
Aristotle’s classification of, i, 222;
Hegel’s, ii, 48, 305, 311;
Plato’s, i, 40, ch. 4 (II), 44, 220, 222;
(see also classes);
Aristotle’s theory, i, 112, ii, 3, 282;
Hegel’s theory, ii, 31, 45-7, 57, 63-6, 74, 305, 310, 311;
(see also national state);
Marx’s theory, ii, 118-20, 157, 162, 193, 328;
modern totalitarianist theory, ii, 63, 65;
(see also national state);
Plato’s theory, i, 25, 31, 39, 53, 45-9, 50-4, 226.
statesmen, see rulers.
status quo, i, 110, 117, 288.
stoicism, i, 277, 298.
strain of civilization, i, 5, 171, 176t, 188-9, 195, 199, 295t, ch. 10
(VII), 301, 316, 317, ii, 64, 98, 161, 228, 276.
Study of History, A (A. J. Toynbee), ii, 251, 360.
Sumer, i, 295, ii, 50.
superstition, ii, 95, 318;
(see also prejudice).
surplus population, ii, 176, 179.
taboo, tabooism, i, 15, 60, 65, 148, 172, 173, 300, ii, 301;
(see also tribalism).
taxation, taxes, ii, 141, 170, 334, 335.
technocracy, ii, 334.
technology (proper), i, 163, ii, 143, 324;
social, see social technology.
teleology, ii, 5, 6, 285, 286.
testability, see refutability.
Theaetetus, dating of, i, 320.
Themis, i, 253.
theory, ii, 262-3, 363;
and experiment, ii, 260;
(see also experiment);
and practice, ii, 222, 243, 256, 263.

Thirty Tyrants, the, i, 18, 128, 142, 192, 193, 195, 200, 266, 299,
505-4, 326, ch. 10, n. 48.
timocracy, i, 401-41, 47.
tolerance, i, 235, 265, 266, ii, 109, 238, 257.
Tom Sawyer (Mark Twain), i, 270.
totalitarianism, i, 2, 2, 4, 5, 107-8, 113, 119, 770, 182, 189, ii, 668, 302, 395;
Hegel’s, ii, 69-70, 72-3, 310;
Plato’s, i, 86, 87, 138-9, 338, 341.
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (L. Wittgenstein), i, 205, 234; ii,
16, 246, 293, 296-8, 316, 353, 355, 359, 366.
trade cycle, see economics, unemployment.
tradition, i, 115, 124, 231, 266, 268, ii, 60, 308;
rational, i, 188, 204, 300.
trahison des clercs, ii, 393.
translations, literal, i, 328.
trial and error, i, 167, 286, ii, 82, 132, 221 (cp. ii, 238, 244, 288-9).
tribalism, i, 9t, 172, 174, ii, 228;
(see also collectivism);
breakdown of, 176-7, 294;
Greek, 176-7, ii, 281;
(see also Sparta);
Jewish, i, 17, 203, 279, ii, 22, 301;
Marxist, ii, 337;
modern, i, 316;
Scottish, ii, 301;
Aristotle, i, 261;
Hegel, ii, 30;
(see also nationalism);
Plato, i, 80, 199;
Toynbee’s attack on, ii, 251.
truth, i, 273-4, ii, 221, 261, 369-96;
(see also semantics);
Hegel’s theory of, i, 144, 274, ii, 41-2, 60, 68;
Plato’s theory of, i, 143-4;
Pragmatic, i, 274;
science and, ii, 12-13, 20, 221, 244, 261, 363, 363.
tyranny, i, 124-5, 151-2, 159, 235, 315, ii, 160-1, 305, 342;
Plato against, i, 40-4, 123, 170, 198, 200, , 315;
(see however i, 317);
Plato on inevitability of war under, i, 43, 198;

Plato on tyranny and Utopian engineering, i, 44, 222.
unemployment, ii, 168-9, 178, 180-2, 194, 195;
insurance against, ii, 140, 182, 183;
and trade cycle, ii, 348.
United States, i, page vii, 197, ii, 158, 189, 329, 335, 340.
unity of mankind, i, 152, 236, 278, 279, 281, ii, 214, 224, 225, 232,
239, 244, 246, 258, 361.
unity of opposites, i, 16, 171, 204-5, 207, 209, ii, 40, 76, 249.
universal laws, see laws, universals, ii, 245, 290.
utilitarianism, i, 235, 254, 284-5, ii, 304;
Plato’s collectivist, i, 107, 108, 138;
of Antiphon, i, 69;
Hegel’s attack on, ii, 75.
Utopianism, i, 157t, 164, ii, 367;
(see also aestheticism; ‘canvas-cleaning’; romanticism; social
engineering, Utopian), ch. 19 (II);
Marx’s and Marxists’ ambiguity regarding, ii, 150, 154, 156,
157, ch. 19 (IV), 342;
economic, ii, 124-5;
and irrationalism, ii, 212, 234, 257.
Virgo, constellation, i, 254.
War, see international relations;
American civil war, ii, 329;
and economics, ii, 105;
religious, ii, 237, 244;
World War I, ii, 116;
World War II, page vi;
Hegel on, ii, 37, 58, 65, 68-9;
(see also fame and fate);
Heraclitus on, i, 16;
(see also fame and fate);
Kolnai on, ii, 77;
modern totalitarians on, ii, 65, 70, 71;
Plato on, i, 43, 198, 259.
west, the, western civilization, i, 102, 171, 175, 232, 267, ii, 24,
243, 257.
wisdom,
Plato on, i, 128, 144, ch. 8 (III), 145, 146, 269, 275;
Socrates on, i, 128-9, 308-9.
wishful thinking, ii, 139, 197, 333.
workers, working class, ii, 343 f.;

Aristotle on, i, 261, ii, 3, 282-3;
Hegel on, ii, 315;
Marx on, ii, 108, 114, 115, 121 146, 189-90, 198, 337;
Plato on, i, 47, 76, 98, 225, 258, 259, ii, 283;
(see also human cattle).
‘Workers, unite!’, ii, 108, 145, 178, 185.
Versailles, Treaty of, ii, 318.
violence, i, 331, 336, ii, 143, 149-52.
Zeus, i, 15, 16, 43, 66.
zoologism, i, 317t.

Index Of Platonic Passages
This Index has been compiled upon the suggestion of Mr.
Richard Robinson, made in The Philosophical Review, 60, 1951, p.
503. Numbers in brackets refer to Platonic passages. Numbers
outside brackets refer to pages of vol. I of the present book; those
following brackets refer to pages where the passages in brackets
are quoted or discussed.
Alcibiades I, 303.
Apology, 269, 304-5, 306, 308, 309, 310; (18b-c) 307; (18d-e)
308, (19c) 190, 301, 307, 308, (20e/21a) 310, (23d) 307, (30e/31a)
194, (32b-d) 128, 266, 305, 310, (40 ff.) 308, 322, 330 f., 333.
Charmides, (157c, 162d) 273, 311.
Crito, 304-5, 306 (45e) 304, (47e/48a) 302, (51-54) 194, 304,
305.
Euthyphro, 197, 315.
Gorgias, 309-10; (451a/b, c, 453e, 465a, b/c) 320, (483b) 117,
262, (488e-489b), 92-93, 117, 254-5, 262, (508a) 256, 262, 320,
(521d) 130, (522e) 320, (525e) 269, (527b) 262.
Hippias (Greater), (303b/c) 249.
Laws, 219, 229, 306, 309, 331, 338f.; (634d/e) 267, (636b)
295, (649d/e) 269, (676a) 38, (575b/c) 44, 210, 217, 223, (681b)
226, (682e-683c/d) 226, 227, (683e) 45, (689c-d) 275, (690b/c) 77,
(704d) 283, (709e-714a) 44, 222, 245, (718c-722b) 139, 213, 270,
271, 316, (739c) 102, 219, 258, (740d-741a) 295, (742 -c) 184,
298, (744b) 256, (757a) 96, 256, (757b-d) 248, 270, (797d) 217,
218, 224, (836b/c) 295, (838e) 295, (895b) 217, 219, (895d-e) 216,
249, (896e, 898c) 317, (903c) 80-1, 100, 219, 242, 258, (904-909)

36-7, 142, 217-18, 273, (907d-909d) 331, (942a) 103, 219, 259,
(942c) 103, 132, 259, (942) 342, (950d) 298, (966e) 217, 219.
Menexenus, 197, 299; (235b) 197, (236a) 296, (238e-239a) 96,
255-6, (245c-d) 226, 278.
Meno, 129, 267, 309; (81a) 314, (86d/e) 216.
Parmenides, 313; (135c-d) 134, 268.
Phaedo, 222, 266-7, 308, 309, 312; (65a-66a) 214, (70e/71a,
72a/b) 209, (73a) 312, (74a) 214 (79d) 314, (89c-d) 283, 299,
(100d) 211.
Philebus, (16c) 219, (48c/d) 269, (59a-c) 215.
Protagoras, 235, 241; (322a) 66, (337a) 256, (337e) 333.
Republic, 93, 195, 197, 209, 219, 220, 228, 301, 305, 306, 308,
309, 320, 330-7; (344a) 105, (358c) 117, 261, 262, (359) 118, 254,
262, (362) 262, (365-8) 105, 262-3, 271-2, 282, 315, (369b-c) 77,
219, 226, 240, 241, 247, (378c) 229, 240, (380d) 212, 219, (380e381c) 217, (387d/e) 259, (389b-d) 138-9, (390e) 271, (397e) 247,
(398e) 229-30, (406c, 407e), 138-9, (414b-d) 140-1, 209, 270, 272,
273, (415a-6) 140-1, 225, 240, (415d/e) 226, (423b) 80, 182, 298,
(425b-427a/b) 224, (430d) 98, 257-8, (432b) 99, 258, (433) 90, 967, 257, (434a-c) 49, 106-7, 225, (440c-d) 51, 92, 254, (459b) 51,
150, 276, (460a-b) 150, (460c) 51, 82, 228, (466b/c) 108, 269,
(468c) 150-1, 276, (469b-471c) 152, 224, 278-80, (473c-e) 132,
151-2, 276-7, 279-81, (474c-502d) 145-6, (475) 138, 145, 314,
(476b) 145, (484c) 149, (485) 146, 214, 217, 240, 275, (489b/c)
154, 283, (494b) 154, 282-3, (494c/d) 278, 281, 282, (495d/e) 277,
(496c-d) 154, 185, 282-3, 299, (497d) 133, (498b/c) 133, 267,
(498d/e) 155, 283-4, (499b-c) 282-3, (499c/d) 280, (500c-501e)
146, 149, 150, 165, 166, 224, 276, (506) 146, 274-5, (508b/c) 215,
274, (508d-e) 217, (509c) 274, (509c-511e) 214, 271-272, (519e)
80, 102, 140, 169, 242, 271, (520c) 165, (520d) 155, (525c) 248,
(527a/b) 214, 217, (528b-d) 249-50, (534d) 249, (535a/b) 149,
275, (536a/b) 281, (537c-e) 137, 268, (539d) 134, (537-540) 134,
262, (540c) 132, 138, 149, (540e/541d) 165, 1 66, 292, 327, (544c)
40, 227, (545d) 45, 219, (546a) 81, 141, 217, 272, 281, 282, (546b)
82-3, 242-6, (546c) 249, (546d/e) 153, 281-2, (546e/547a) 209,
219, (547a) 141, 198, 315, (548e-549d) 41, 224, 228, 313, (554c,
f.) 42, 221, (558b) 221, 316, (558c) 96, 254, (592b) 280, (560b)
42, (561e) 254, (562b-565e)43, 123, 221, 265, 278, (563b-d) 254,
255, 316, 334, (566e) 43, 170, 198, 315, (571b, 575a) 313, (577a,
f.) 43, 222, (577c) 315, (580b) 221, (588c) 197, 313, (592b) 280,
(595b) 229, 240, (608e) 35, (615d) 269.

Second Letter, (314c) 313.
Seventh Letter, 208, 309; (314b/c) 275, (325) 19, 282, 311,
(326a) 309, 311, (342a) 309.
Sophist, 322; (223c) 219, (242e) 208, (248e-249c) 220, (252e,
ff.) 219.
Statesman, 19 f., 208, 211, 219, 220, 283, 309, 331, 336;
(258b) 283, (268c-274e) 19-20, 36, 50, 209, 270, (271a, f.) 226,
270, 273 (274d) 280, (289b-e) 225, (292c) 283, (293c-6) 166, 209,
292, 328, (296b, ff.) 271, (296d) 36, (297c) 209, 222, (300e, f.)
222, (301c/d) 43 f., 209, 222, (302b, ff.) 209, (303b) 209, (304c/d)
271, (309a) 225.
Symposium, (178e), 295, (179e), 325, (191b) 209, (193d) 169,
218-19, (199c/d) 216, (200a) 313, (208d) (174e/f) 320, 153, 208,
282.
Theaetetus, 321; (142a-143c) 321-2, (174) 215, (174e, f) 281,
321, (179e) 312.
Timaeus, 215, 230, 320; (18c/d) 48, 225, (20a) 311, (24a-b)
224, 275, (45b-c, 47a-d) 314, (48) 30, 215, (50) 27, 211, (53c-62c)
249-53, (91b-92b/c) 37. There is also a discussion of 42a, f., 90e,
and 91d, f., in the second volume of this book (note 11 to chapter
11, pp. 284 f.).

[1]

‘A’ stands in this Addendum for the American editions of 1950 and 1956;
‘E’ for the present edition and for the English editions from 1952 on.
[2]

Added in 1965. That the word ‘douleia’ in the passage in question (Republic
563d) bears this literal meaning (in addition to the figurative meaning which
Professor Levinson correctly attributes to it) is confirmed by Shorey, the great
Platonist and open enemy of democracy, whom Professor Levinson considers an
authority on Plato’s text. (I can often agree with Shorey’s interpretation of Plato
because he rarely tries to humanize or liberalize Plato’s text.) For in a footnote
which Shorey attaches to the word ‘servitude’ (douleia) in his translation of Republic
563d, he refers to two parallel passages: Gorgias 491e, and Laws 890a. The first of
these reads in W. R. M. Lamb’s translation (Loeb Edition): ‘For how can a man be
happy if he is a slave to anybody at all?’ Here the phrase ‘to be a slave’ has, like the
one in the Republic, not only the figurative meaning ‘to submit oneself’ but also the
literal meaning; indeed, the whole point is the merging of the two meanings. The
passage from the Laws 890a (an elaborate attack on certain Sophists of the Great
Generation) reads in Bury’s translation (Loeb Edition) as follows: ‘these teachers
[who corrupt the young men] attract them towards the life...” according to nature”
which consists in being master over the rest, in reality [aletheia], instead of being a
slave to others, according to legal convention. Plato clearly alludes here among
others to those Sophists (p. 70E = p. 70A and note 13 to chapter 5) who taught that

men cannot be slaves ‘by nature’ or ‘in truth’, but only ‘by legal convention’ (by
legal fiction). Thus Shorey connects the crucial passage of the Republic by this
reference at least indirectly to the great classical discussion of the theory of slavery
(‘slavery’ in the literal sense).
[3]

It is by no means the only instance, as may be seen from my chapter 8.
The passage quoted in the text to note a, for example (Rep., 389b), is a different
instance from the passage (Rep., 460a) which Professor Levinson has in mind.
There are several other passages. See Rep., 415d and especially Tim,, 18e, which
prove that Plato finds his instruction to lie of sufficient importance to be
included in the very brief summary of the Republic. (See also Laws, 663d down
to 664b.)
HTPU

UPTH

