Tract atus
Logico-Philosophicus
‘Among the productions of the twentieth century the
Tractatus continues to stand out for its beauty and its
power.’
A. J. Ayer
‘Mr Wittgenstein, in his preface, tells us that his book is
not a textbook, and that its object will be attained if
there is one person who reads it with understanding and
to whom it affords pleasure. We think there are many
persons who will read it with understanding and enjoy
it. The treatise is clear and lucid. The author is continually arresting us with new and striking thoughts, and he
closes on a note of mystical exaltation.’
Times Literary Supplement
‘Quite as exciting as we had been led to suppose it to
be.’
New Statesman
‘Pears and McGuinness can claim our gratitude not for
doing merely this (a better translation) but for doing it
with such a near approach to perfection.’
Mind

Ludwig

Wittgenstein
Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus

Translated by D. F. Pears and B. F. McGuinness
With an introduction by Bertrand Russell

London and New York

First published in Annalen der Naturphilosophie 1921
English edition ﬁrst published 1922
by Kegan Paul, Trench and Trübner
This translation ﬁrst published 1961
by Routledge & Kegan Paul
Revised edition 1974
First published in Routledge Classics 2001
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2002.
© 1961, 1974 Routledge & Kegan Paul
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been applied for
ISBN 0–415–25562–7 (hbk)
ISBN 0–415–25408–6 (pbk)
ISBN 0-203-01034-5 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-19091-2 (Glassbook Format)

C ONTENTS

Translators’ Preface
Introduction by Bertrand Russell
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus Preface
Translation
Index

vii
ix
3
5
91

v

T RANSLATORS’ P REFACE

This edition contains an English translation of Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung, which ﬁrst appeared in
1921 in the German periodical Annalen der Naturphilosophie. An earlier English translation made by C. K. Ogden with the assistance
of F. P. Ramsey appeared in 1922 with the German text printed en
face. The present translation was published in 1961, also with the
German text. It has now been revised in the light of Wittgenstein’s own suggestions and comments in his correspondence
with C. K. Ogden about the ﬁrst translation. This correspondence
has now been published by Professor G. H. von Wright (Blackwell, Oxford, and Routledge & Kegan Paul, London and Boston,
1972).
Bertrand Russell’s introduction to the edition of 1922 has
been reprinted with his permission. The translations it contains, which are those of Russell himself or of the ﬁrst English
translator, have been left unaltered.
1974
vii

I NTRODUCTION
By Bertrand Russell, F.R.S.

Mr Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, whether or not it
prove to give the ultimate truth on the matters with which it
deals, certainly deserves, by its breadth and scope and profundity, to be considered an important event in the philosophical
world. Starting from the principles of Symbolism and the relations which are necessary between words and things in any
language, it applies the result of this inquiry to various departments of traditional philosophy, showing in each case how
traditional philosophy and traditional solutions arise out of
ignorance of the principles of Symbolism and out of misuse
of language.
The logical structure of propositions and the nature of logical
inference are ﬁrst dealt with. Thence we pass successively to
Theory of Knowledge, Principles of Physics, Ethics, and ﬁnally
the Mystical (das Mystiche).
In order to understand Mr Wittgenstein’s book, it is necessary
to realize what is the problem with which he is concerned. In
the part of his theory which deals with Symbolism he is concerned with the conditions which would have to be fulﬁlled by a
ix

introduction

logically perfect language. There are various problems as regards
language. First, there is the problem what actually occurs in our
minds when we use language with the intention of meaning
something by it; this problem belongs to psychology. Secondly,
there is the problem as to what is the relation subsisting between
thoughts, words, or sentences, and that which they refer to or
mean; this problem belongs to epistemology. Thirdly, there is
the problem of using sentences so as to convey truth rather than
falsehood; this belongs to the special sciences dealing with the
subject-matter of the sentences in question. Fourthly, there is the
question: what relation must one fact (such as a sentence) have
to another in order to be capable of being a symbol for that other?
This last is a logical question, and is the one with which Mr
Wittgenstein is concerned. He is concerned with the conditions
for accurate Symbolism, i.e. for Symbolism in which a sentence
‘means’ something quite deﬁnite. In practice, language is always
more or less vague, so that what we assert is never quite precise.
Thus, logic has two problems to deal with in regard to Symbolism: (1) the conditions for sense rather than nonsense in combinations of symbols; (2) the conditions for uniqueness of
meaning or reference in symbols or combinations of symbols. A
logically perfect language has rules of syntax which prevent nonsense, and has single symbols which always have a deﬁnite and
unique meaning. Mr Wittgenstein is concerned with the conditions for a logically perfect language—not that any language is
logically perfect, or that we believe ourselves capable, here and
now, of constructing a logically perfect language, but that the
whole function of language is to have meaning, and it only fulﬁls
this function in proportion as it approaches to the ideal language
which we postulate.
The essential business of language is to assert or deny facts.
Given the syntax of a language, the meaning of a sentence is
determinate as soon as the meaning of the component words is
known. In order that a certain sentence should assert a certain
fact there must, however the language may be constructed, be
x

introduction

something in common between the structure of the sentence
and the structure of the fact. This is perhaps the most fundamental thesis of Mr Wittgenstein’s theory. That which has to be
in common between the sentence and the fact cannot, so he
contends, be itself in turn said in language. It can, in his phraseology, only be shown, not said, for whatever we may say will still
need to have the same structure.
The ﬁrst requisite of an ideal language would be that there
should be one name for every simple, and never the same name
for two diﬀerent simples. A name is a simple symbol in the sense
that it has no parts which are themselves symbols. In a logically
perfect language nothing that is not simple will have a simple
symbol. The symbol for the whole will be a ‘complex’, containing the symbols for the parts. In speaking of a ‘complex’ we are,
as will appear later, sinning against the rules of philosophical
grammar, but this is unavoidable at the outset. ‘Most propositions and questions that have been written about philosophical
matters are not false but senseless. We cannot, therefore, answer
questions of this kind at all, but only state their senselessness.
Most questions and propositions of the philosophers result from
the fact that we do not understand the logic of our language.
They are of the same kind as the question whether the Good is
more or less identical than the Beautiful’ (4.003). What is complex in the world is a fact. Facts which are not compounded of
other facts are what Mr Wittgenstein calls Sachverhalte, whereas a
fact which may consist of two or more facts is called a Tatsache:
thus, for example, ‘Socrates is wise’ is a Sachverhalt, as well as a
Tatsache, whereas ‘Socrates is wise and Plato is his pupil’ is a
Tatsache but not a Sachverhalt.
He compares linguistic expression to projection in geometry.
A geometrical ﬁgure may be projected in many ways: each of
these ways corresponds to a diﬀerent language, but the projective properties of the original ﬁgure remain unchanged whichever of these ways may be adopted. These projective properties
correspond to that which in his theory the proposition and the
xi

introduction

fact must have in common, if the proposition is to assert the fact.
In certain elementary ways this is, of course, obvious. It is
impossible, for example, to make a statement about two men
(assuming for the moment that the men may be treated as
simples), without employing two names, and if you are going to
assert a relation between the two men it will be necessary that
the sentence in which you make the assertion shall establish a
relation between the two names. If we say ‘Plato loves Socrates’,
the word ‘loves’ which occurs between the word ‘Plato’ and the
word ‘Socrates’ establishes a certain relation between these two
words, and it is owing to this fact that our sentence is able to
assert a relation between the persons named by the words ‘Plato’
and ‘Socrates’. ‘We must not say, the complex sign “aRb” says “a
stands in a certain relation R to b”; but we must say, that “a”
stands in a certain relation to “b” says that aRb’ (3.1432).
Mr Wittgenstein begins his theory of Symbolism with the
statement (2.1): ‘We make to ourselves pictures of facts.’ A picture, he says, is a model of the reality, and to the objects in the
reality correspond the elements of the picture: the picture itself
is a fact. The fact that things have a certain relation to each other
is represented by the fact that in the picture its elements have a
certain relation to one another. ‘In the picture and the pictured
there must be something identical in order that the one can be a
picture of the other at all. What the picture must have in common with reality in order to be able to represent it after its
manner—rightly or falsely—is its form of representation’
(2.161, 2.17).
We speak of a logical picture of a reality when we wish to
imply only so much resemblance as is essential to its being a
picture in any sense, that is to say, when we wish to imply no
more than identity of logical form. The logical picture of a fact,
he says, is a Gedanke. A picture can correspond or not correspond
with the fact and be accordingly true or false, but in both cases it
shares the logical form with the fact. The sense in which he
speaks of pictures is illustrated by his statement: ‘The gramoxii

introduction

phone record, the musical thought, the score, the waves of
sound, all stand to one another in that pictorial internal relation
which holds between language and the world. To all of them the
logical structure is common. (Like the two youths, their two
horses and their lilies in the story. They are all in a certain sense
one)’ (4.014). The possibility of a proposition representing a
fact rests upon the fact that in it objects are represented by signs.
The so-called logical ‘constants’ are not represented by signs, but
are themselves present in the proposition as in the fact. The
proposition and the fact must exhibit the same logical ‘manifold’, and this cannot be itself represented since it has to be in
common between the fact and the picture. Mr Wittgenstein
maintains that everything properly philosophical belongs to
what can only be shown, to what is in common between a fact
and its logical picture. It results from this view that nothing
correct can be said in philosophy. Every philosophical proposition is bad grammar, and the best that we can hope to achieve
by philosophical discussion is to lead people to see that philosophical discussion is a mistake. ‘Philosophy is not one of the
natural sciences. (The word “philosophy” must mean something
which stands above or below, but not beside the natural sciences.) The object of philosophy is the logical clariﬁcation of
thoughts. Philosophy is not a theory but an activity. A philosophical work consists essentially of elucidations. The result of
philosophy is not a number of “philosophical propositions”, but
to make propositions clear. Philosophy should make clear and
delimit sharply the thoughts which otherwise are, as it were,
opaque and blurred’ (4.111 and 4.112). In accordance with this
principle the things that have to be said in leading the reader to
understand Mr Wittgenstein’s theory are all of them things
which that theory itself condemns as meaningless. With this
proviso we will endeavour to convey the picture of the world
which seems to underlie his system.
The world consists of facts: facts cannot strictly speaking be
deﬁned, but we can explain what we mean by saying that facts
xiii

introduction

are what make propositions true, or false. Facts may contain parts
which are facts or may contain no such parts; for example:
‘Socrates was a wise Athenian’, consists of the two facts, ‘Socrates
was wise’, and ‘Socrates was an Athenian’. A fact which has no
parts that are facts is called by Mr Wittgenstein a Sachverhalt. This
is the same thing that he calls an atomic fact. An atomic fact,
although it contains no parts that are facts, nevertheless does
contain parts. If we may regard ‘Socrates is wise’ as an atomic
fact we perceive that it contains the constituents ‘Socrates’ and
‘wise’. If an atomic fact is analysed as fully as possible (theoretical, not practical possibility is meant) the constituents ﬁnally
reached may be called ‘simples’ or ‘objects’. It is not contended
by Wittgenstein that we can actually isolate the simple or have
empirical knowledge of it. It is a logical necessity demanded by
theory, like an electron. His ground for maintaining that there
must be simples is that every complex presupposes a fact. It is
not necessarily assumed that the complexity of facts is ﬁnite;
even if every fact consisted of an inﬁnite number of atomic facts
and if every atomic fact consisted of an inﬁnite number of
objects there would still be objects and atomic facts (4.2211).
The assertion that there is a certain complex reduces to the assertion that its constituents are related in a certain way, which is the
assertion of a fact: thus if we give a name to the complex the name
only has meaning in virtue of the truth of a certain proposition,
namely the proposition asserting the relatedness of the constituents of the complex. Thus the naming of complexes presupposes
propositions, while propositions presuppose the naming of
simples. In this way the naming of simples is shown to be what
is logically ﬁrst in logic.
The world is fully described if all atomic facts are known,
together with the fact that these are all of them. The world is not
described by merely naming all the objects in it; it is necessary
also to know the atomic facts of which these objects are
constituents. Given this totality of atomic facts, every true
proposition, however complex, can theoretically be inferred. A
xiv

introduction

proposition (true or false) asserting an atomic fact is called an
atomic proposition. All atomic propositions are logically
independent of each other. No atomic proposition implies any
other or is inconsistent with any other. Thus the whole business
of logical inference is concerned with propositions which are
not atomic. Such propositions may be called molecular.
Wittgenstein’s theory of molecular propositions turns upon
his theory of the construction of truth-functions.
A truth-function of a proposition p is a proposition containing p and such that its truth or falsehood depends only upon
the truth or falsehood of p, and similarly a truth-function of
several propositions p, q, r, . . . is one containing p, q, r, . . . and
such that its truth or falsehood depends only upon the truth
or falsehood of p, q, r, . . . . It might seem at ﬁrst sight as
though there were other functions of propositions besides
truth-functions; such, for example, would be ‘A believes p’, for
in general A will believe some true propositions and some
false ones: unless he is an exceptionally gifted individual, we
cannot infer that p is true from the fact that he believes it or
that p is false from the fact that he does not believe it. Other
apparent exceptions would be such as ‘p is a very complex
proposition’ or ‘p is a proposition about Socrates’. Mr Wittgenstein maintains, however, for reasons which will appear
presently, that such exceptions are only apparent, and that
every function of a proposition is really a truth-function. It
follows that if we can deﬁne truth-functions generally, we can
obtain a general deﬁnition of all propositions in terms of the
original set of atomic propositions. This Wittgenstein proceeds
to do.
It has been shown by Dr Sheﬀer (Trans. Am. Math. Soc., Vol. XIV.
pp. 481–488) that all truth-functions of a given set of propositions can be constructed out of either of the two functions ‘not-p
or not-q’ or ‘not-p and not-q’. Wittgenstein makes use of the
latter, assuming a knowledge of Dr Sheﬀer’s work. The manner
in which other truth-functions are constructed out of ‘not-p and
xv

introduction

not-q’ is easy to see. ‘Not-p and not-p’ is equivalent to ‘not-p’,
hence we obtain a deﬁnition of negation in terms of our primitive function: hence we can deﬁne ‘p or q’, since this is the negation of ‘not-p and not-q’, i.e. of our primitive function. The
development of other truth-functions out of ‘not-p’ and ‘p or q’
is given in detail at the beginning of Principia Mathematica. This
gives all that is wanted when the propositions which are
arguments to our truth-function are given by enumeration.
Wittgenstein, however, by a very interesting analysis succeeds in
extending the process to general propositions, i.e. to cases where
the propositions which are arguments to our truth-function are
not given by enumeration but are given as all those satisfying
some condition. For example, let fx be a propositional function
(i.e. a function whose values are propositions), such as ‘x is
human’—then the various values of fx form a set of propositions. We may extend the idea ‘not-p and not-q’ so as to apply to
simultaneous denial of all the propositions which are values of
fx. In this way we arrive at the proposition which is ordinarily
represented in mathematical logic by the words ‘fx is false for all
values of x’. The negation of this would be the proposition ‘there
is at least one fx for which fx is true’ which is represented by
‘(∃x).fx’. If we had started with not-fx instead of fx we should
have arrived at the proposition ‘fx is true for all values of x’
which is represented by ‘(x).fx’. Wittgenstein’s method of dealing with general propositions [i.e. ‘(x).fx’ and ‘(∃x).fx’] diﬀers
from previous methods by the fact that the generality comes
only in specifying the set of propositions concerned, and when
this has been done the building up of truth-functions proceeds
exactly as it would in the case of a ﬁnite number of enumerated
arguments p, q, r, . . . .
Mr Wittgenstein’s explanation of his symbolism at this point
is not quite fully given in the text. The symbol he uses is
[p̄, ξ-, N(ξ-)].
The following is the explanation of this symbol:
xvi

introduction

p̄ stands for all atomic propositions.
ξ stands for any set of propositions.
N(ξ-) stands for the negation of all the propositions making
up ξ-.
The whole symbol [p̄, ξ-, N(ξ-)] means whatever can be
obtained by taking any selection of atomic propositions, negating them all, then taking any selection of the set of propositions
now obtained, together with any of the originals—and so on
indeﬁnitely. This is, he says, the general truth-function and also
the general form of proposition. What is meant is somewhat less
complicated than it sounds. The symbol is intended to describe a
process by the help of which, given the atomic propositions, all
others can be manufactured. The process depends upon:
(a) Sheﬀer’s proof that all truth-functions can be obtained
out of simultaneous negation, i.e. out of ‘not-p and not-q’;
(b) Mr Wittgenstein’s theory of the derivation of general
propositions from conjunctions and disjunctions;
(c) The assertion that a proposition can only occur in another
proposition as argument to a truth-function.
Given these three foundations, it follows that all propositions
which are not atomic can be derived from such as are, by a
uniform process, and it is this process which is indicated by Mr
Wittgenstein’s symbol.
From this uniform method of construction we arrive at an
amazing simpliﬁcation of the theory of inference, as well as a
deﬁnition of the sort of propositions that belong to logic. The
method of generation which has just been described enables
Wittgenstein to say that all propositions can be constructed in
the above manner from atomic propositions, and in this way the
totality of propositions is deﬁned. (The apparent exceptions
which we mentioned above are dealt with in a manner which we
shall consider later.) Wittgenstein is enabled to assert that propositions are all that follows from the totality of atomic propositions (together with the fact that it is the totality of them); that a
xvii

introduction

proposition is always a truth-function of atomic propositions;
and that if p follows from q the meaning of p is contained in the
meaning of q, from which of course it results that nothing can be
deduced from an atomic proposition. All the propositions of
logic, he maintains, are tautologies, such, for example, as ‘p or
not-p’.
The fact that nothing can be deduced from an atomic proposition has interesting applications, for example, to causality.
There cannot, in Wittgenstein’s logic, be any such thing as a
causal nexus. ‘The events of the future’, he says, ‘cannot be
inferred from those of the present. Superstition is the belief in
the causal nexus.’ That the sun will rise to-morrow is a hypothesis. We do not in fact know whether it will rise, since there is no
compulsion according to which one thing must happen because
another happens.
Let us now take up another subject—that of names. In Wittgenstein’s theoretical logical language, names are only given to
simples. We do not give two names to one thing, or one name to
two things. There is no way whatever, according to him, by
which we can describe the totality of things that can be named,
in other words, the totality of what there is in the world. In order
to be able to do this we should have to know of some property
which must belong to every thing by a logical necessity. It has
been sought to ﬁnd such a property in self-identity, but the
conception of identity is subjected by Wittgenstein to a destructive criticism from which there seems no escape. The deﬁnition
of identity by means of the identity of indiscernibles is rejected,
because the identity of indiscernibles appears to be not a logically necessary principle. According to this principle x is identical
with y if every property of x is a property of y, but it would, after
all, be logically possible for two things to have exactly the same
properties. If this does not in fact happen that is an accidental
characteristic of the world, not a logically necessary characteristic, and accidental characteristics of the world must, of course,
not be admitted into the structure of logic. Mr Wittgenstein
xviii

introduction

accordingly banishes identity and adopts the convention that
diﬀerent letters are to mean diﬀerent things. In practice, identity
is needed as between a name and a description or between two
descriptions. It is needed for such propositions as ‘Socrates is the
philosopher who drank the hemlock’, or ‘The even prime is the
next number after 1’. For such uses of identity it is easy to
provide on Wittgenstein’s system.
The rejection of identity removes one method of speaking of
the totality of things, and it will be found that any other method
that may be suggested is equally fallacious: so, at least, Wittgenstein contends and, I think, rightly. This amounts to saying that
‘object’ is a pseudo-concept. To say ‘x is an object’ is to say
nothing. It follows from this that we cannot make such statements as ‘there are more than three objects in the world’, or
‘there are an inﬁnite number of objects in the world’. Objects
can only be mentioned in connexion with some deﬁnite property. We can say ‘there are more than three objects which are
human’, or ‘there are more than three objects which are red’, for
in these statements the word ‘object’ can be replaced by a variable in the language of logic, the variable being one which
satisﬁes in the ﬁrst case the function ‘x is human’; in the second
the function ‘x is red’. But when we attempt to say ‘there are
more than three objects’, this substitution of the variable for
the word ‘object’ becomes impossible, and the proposition is
therefore seen to be meaningless.
We here touch one instance of Wittgenstein’s fundamental
thesis, that it is impossible to say anything about the world as a
whole, and that whatever can be said has to be about bounded
portions of the world. This view may have been originally suggested by notation, and if so, that is much in its favour, for a
good notation has a subtlety and suggestiveness which at times
make it seem almost like a live teacher. Notational irregularities
are often the ﬁrst sign of philosophical errors, and a perfect
notation would be a substitute for thought. But although notation may have ﬁrst suggested to Mr Wittgenstein the limitation
xix

introduction

of logic to things within the world as opposed to the world as a
whole, yet the view, once suggested, is seen to have much else to
recommend it. Whether it is ultimately true I do not, for my
part, profess to know. In this Introduction I am concerned to
expound it, not to pronounce upon it. According to this view we
could only say things about the world as a whole if we could get
outside the world, if, that is to say, it ceased to be for us the
whole world. Our world may be bounded for some superior
being who can survey it from above, but for us, however ﬁnite it
may be, it cannot have a boundary, since it has nothing outside
it. Wittgenstein uses, as an analogy, the ﬁeld of vision. Our ﬁeld
of vision does not, for us, have a visual boundary, just because
there is nothing outside it, and in like manner our logical world
has no logical boundary because our logic knows of nothing
outside it. These considerations lead him to a somewhat curious
discussion of Solipsism. Logic, he says, ﬁlls the world. The
boundaries of the world are also its boundaries. In logic, therefore, we cannot say, there is this and this in the world, but not
that, for to say so would apparently presuppose that we exclude
certain possibilities, and this cannot be the case, since it would
require that logic should go beyond the boundaries of the world
as if it could contemplate these boundaries from the other side
also. What we cannot think we cannot think, therefore we also
cannot say what we cannot think.
This, he says, gives the key to Solipsism. What Solipsism
intends is quite correct, but this cannot be said, it can only be
shown. That the world is my world appears in the fact that the
boundaries of language (the only language I understand) indicate the boundaries of my world. The metaphysical subject does
not belong to the world but is a boundary of the world.
We must take up next the question of molecular propositions
which are at ﬁrst sight not truth-functions of the propositions
that they contain, such, for example, as ‘A believes p’.
Wittgenstein introduces this subject in the statement of his
position, namely, that all molecular functions are truth-functions.
xx

introduction

He says (5.54): ‘In the general propositional form, propositions occur in a proposition only as bases of truth-operations.’ At ﬁrst sight, he goes on to explain, it seems as if a
proposition could also occur in other ways, e.g. ‘A believes p’.
Here it seems superﬁcially as if the proposition p stood in a sort of
relation to the object A. ‘But it is clear that “A believes that p”, “A
thinks p”, “A says p” are of the form “ ‘p’ says p”; and here we have
no co-ordination of a fact and an object, but a co-ordination of
facts by means of a co-ordination of their objects’ (5.542).
What Mr Wittgenstein says here is said so shortly that its point
is not likely to be clear to those who have not in mind the
controversies with which he is concerned. The theory with
which he is disagreeing will be found in my articles on the
nature of truth and falsehood in Philosophical Essays and Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society, 1906–7. The problem at issue is the problem
of the logical form of belief, i.e. what is the schema representing
what occurs when a man believes. Of course, the problem
applies not only to belief, but also to a host of other mental
phenomena which may be called propositional attitudes: doubting, considering, desiring, etc. In all these cases it seems natural
to express the phenomenon in the form ‘A doubts p’, ‘A desires
p’, etc., which makes it appear as though we were dealing with a
relation between a person and a proposition. This cannot, of
course, be the ultimate analysis, since persons are ﬁctions and so
are propositions, except in the sense in which they are facts on
their own account. A proposition, considered as a fact on its own
account, may be a set of words which a man says over to himself,
or a complex image, or train of images passing through his
mind, or a set of incipient bodily movements. It may be any one
of innumerable diﬀerent things. The proposition as a fact on its
own account, for example the actual set of words the man pronounces to himself, is not relevant to logic. What is relevant to
logic is that common element among all these facts, which
enables him, as we say, to mean the fact which the proposition
asserts. To psychology, of course, more is relevant; for a symbol
xxi

introduction

does not mean what it symbolizes in virtue of a logical relation
alone, but in virtue also of a psychological relation of intention,
or association, or what-not. The psychological part of meaning,
however, does not concern the logician. What does concern him
in this problem of belief is the logical schema. It is clear that,
when a person believes a proposition, the person, considered as
a metaphysical subject, does not have to be assumed in order to
explain what is happening. What has to be explained is the relation between the set of words which is the proposition considered as a fact on its own account, and the ‘objective’ fact
which makes the proposition true or false. This reduces ultimately to the question of the meaning of propositions, that is to
say, the meaning of propositions is the only non-psychological
portion of the problem involved in the analysis of belief. This
problem is simply one of a relation of two facts, namely, the
relation between the series of words used by the believer and the
fact which makes these words true or false. The series of words is
a fact just as much as what makes it true or false is a fact. The
relation between these two facts is not unanalysable, since the
meaning of a proposition results from the meaning of its constituent words. The meaning of the series of words which is a
proposition is a function of the meanings of the separate words.
Accordingly, the proposition as a whole does not really enter
into what has to be explained in explaining the meaning of a
proposition. It would perhaps help to suggest the point of view
which I am trying to indicate, to say that in the cases we have
been considering the proposition occurs as a fact, not as a proposition. Such a statement, however, must not be taken too literally. The real point is that in believing, desiring, etc., what is
logically fundamental is the relation of a proposition, considered as
a fact, to the fact which makes it true or false, and that this
relation of two facts is reducible to a relation of their constituents. Thus the proposition does not occur at all in the same sense
in which it occurs in a truth-function.
There are some respects, in which, as it seems to me, Mr
xxii

introduction

Wittgenstein’s theory stands in need of greater technical development. This applies in particular to his theory of number (6.02
ﬀ.) which, as it stands, is only capable of dealing with ﬁnite
numbers. No logic can be considered adequate until it has been
shown to be capable of dealing with transﬁnite numbers. I do
not think there is anything in Mr Wittgenstein’s system to make
it impossible for him to ﬁll this lacuna.
More interesting than such questions of comparative detail is
Mr Wittgenstein’s attitude towards the mystical. His attitude
upon this grows naturally out of his doctrine in pure logic,
according to which the logical proposition is a picture (true or
false) of the fact, and has in common with the fact a certain
structure. It is this common structure which makes it capable of
being a picture of the fact, but the structure cannot itself be put
into words, since it is a structure of words, as well as of the facts
to which they refer. Everything, therefore, which is involved in
the very idea of the expressiveness of language must remain
incapable of being expressed in language, and is, therefore,
inexpressible in a perfectly precise sense. This inexpressible contains, according to Mr Wittgenstein, the whole of logic and
philosophy. The right method of teaching philosophy, he says,
would be to conﬁne oneself to propositions of the sciences,
stated with all possible clearness and exactness, leaving philosophical assertions to the learner, and proving to him, whenever
he made them, that they are meaningless. It is true that the fate of
Socrates might befall a man who attempted this method of
teaching, but we are not to be deterred by that fear, if it is the
only right method. It is not this that causes some hesitation in
accepting Mr Wittgenstein’s position, in spite of the very
powerful arguments which he brings to its support. What causes
hesitation is the fact that, after all, Mr Wittgenstein manages to
say a good deal about what cannot be said, thus suggesting to
the sceptical reader that possibly there may be some
loophole through a hierarchy of languages, or by some other
exit. The whole subject of ethics, for example, is placed by Mr
xxiii

introduction

Wittgenstein in the mystical, inexpressible region. Nevertheless
he is capable of conveying his ethical opinions. His defence
would be that what he calls the mystical can be shown, although
it cannot be said. It may be that this defence is adequate, but, for
my part, I confess that it leaves me with a certain sense of intellectual discomfort.
There is one purely logical problem in regard to which these
diﬃculties are peculiarly acute. I mean the problem of generality. In the theory of generality it is necessary to consider all
propositions of the form fx where fx is a given propositional
function. This belongs to the part of logic which can be
expressed, according to Mr Wittgenstein’s system. But the totality of possible values of x which might seem to be involved in
the totality of propositions of the form fx is not admitted by Mr
Wittgenstein among the things that can be spoken of, for this is
no other than the totality of things in the world, and thus
involves the attempt to conceive the world as a whole; ‘the feeling of the world as a bounded whole is the mystical’; hence the
totality of the values of x is mystical (6.45). This is expressly
argued when Mr Wittgenstein denies that we can make propositions as to how many things there are in the world, as for
example, that there are more than three.
These diﬃculties suggest to my mind some such possibility as
this: that every language has, as Mr Wittgenstein says, a structure
concerning which, in the language, nothing can be said, but that
there may be another language dealing with the structure of the
ﬁrst language, and having itself a new structure, and that to this
hierarchy of languages there may be no limit. Mr Wittgenstein
would of course reply that his whole theory is applicable
unchanged to the totality of such languages. The only retort
would be to deny that there is any such totality. The totalities
concerning which Mr Wittgenstein holds that it is impossible to
speak logically are nevertheless thought by him to exist, and are
the subject-matter of his mysticism. The totality resulting from
our hierarchy would be not merely logically inexpressible, but a
xxiv

introduction

ﬁction, a mere delusion, and in this way the supposed sphere of
the mystical would be abolished. Such an hypothesis is very
diﬃcult, and I can see objections to it which at the moment I do
not know how to answer. Yet I do not see how any easier
hypothesis can escape from Mr Wittgenstein’s conclusions. Even
if this very diﬃcult hypothesis should prove tenable, it would
leave untouched a very large part of Mr Wittgenstein’s theory,
though possibly not the part upon which he himself would wish
to lay most stress. As one with a long experience of the diﬃculties of logic and of the deceptiveness of theories which seem
irrefutable, I ﬁnd myself unable to be sure of the rightness of a
theory, merely on the ground that I cannot see any point on
which it is wrong. But to have constructed a theory of logic
which is not at any point obviously wrong is to have achieved a
work of extraordinary diﬃculty and importance. This merit, in
my opinion, belongs to Mr Wittgenstein’s book, and makes it
one which no serious philosopher can aﬀord to neglect.
B R
May 1922

xxv

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS

Dedicated to the memory of
my friend
David H. Pinsent

Motto: . . . and whatever a man knows, whatever is not mere
rumbling and roaring that he has heard, can be said in three words.
Kürnberger

TRACTATUS
LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS
PREFACE

Perhaps this book will be understood only by someone who has
himself already had the thoughts that are expressed in it—or at least
similar thoughts.—So it is not a textbook.—Its purpose would be
achieved if it gave pleasure to one person who read and understood it.
The book deals with the problems of philosophy, and shows, I
believe, that the reason why these problems are posed is that the
logic of our language is misunderstood. The whole sense of the
book might be summed up in the following words: what can be
said at all can be said clearly, and what we cannot talk about we
must pass over in silence.
Thus the aim of the book is to draw a limit to thought, or
rather—not to thought, but to the expression of thoughts: for in
order to be able to draw a limit to thought, we should have to ﬁnd
both sides of the limit thinkable (i.e. we should have to be able to
think what cannot be thought).
3

tractatus logico-philosophicus

It will therefore only be in language that the limit can be
drawn, and what lies on the other side of the limit will simply be
nonsense.
I do not wish to judge how far my eﬀorts coincide with those of
other philosophers. Indeed, what I have written here makes no
claim to novelty in detail, and the reason why I give no sources is
that it is a matter of indiﬀerence to me whether the thoughts that I
have had have been anticipated by someone else.
I will only mention that I am indebted to Frege’s great works and
to the writings of my friend Mr Bertrand Russell for much of the
stimulation of my thoughts.
If this work has any value, it consists in two things: the ﬁrst is that
thoughts are expressed in it, and on this score the better the
thoughts are expressed—the more the nail has been hit on the
head—the greater will be its value.—Here I am conscious of having
fallen a long way short of what is possible. Simply because my
powers are too slight for the accomplishment of the task.—May
others come and do it better.
On the other hand the truth of the thoughts that are here communicated seems to me unassailable and deﬁnitive. I therefore
believe myself to have found, on all essential points, the ﬁnal solution of the problems. And if I am not mistaken in this belief, then
the second thing in which the value of this work consists is that it
shows how little is achieved when these problems are solved.
L. W.
Vienna, 1918

4

1*

The world is all that is the case.

1.1

The world is the totality of facts, not of things.

1.11

The world is determined by the facts, and by their being
all the facts.

1.12

For the totality of facts determines what is the case, and
also whatever is not the case.

1.13

The facts in logical space are the world.

1.2

The world divides into facts.

1.21

Each item can be the case or not the case while everything else remains the same.

2

What is the case—a fact—is the existence of states of
aﬀairs.

2.01

A state of aﬀairs (a state of things) is a combination of
objects (things).

* The decimal numbers assigned to the individual propositions indicate the logical
importance of the propositions, the stress laid on them in my exposition. The
propositions n.1, n.2, n.3, etc. are comments on proposition no. n; the propositions
n.m1, n.m2, etc. are comments on proposition no. n.m; and so on.

5

tractatus logico-philosophicus

2.011

It is essential to things that they should be possible
constituents of states of aﬀairs.

2.012

In logic nothing is accidental: if a thing can occur in a
state of aﬀairs, the possibility of the state of aﬀairs must
be written into the thing itself.

2.0121

It would seem to be a sort of accident, if it turned out
that a situation would ﬁt a thing that could already exist
entirely on its own.
If things can occur in states of aﬀairs, this possibility
must be in them from the beginning.
(Nothing in the province of logic can be merely
possible. Logic deals with every possibility and all
possibilities are its facts.)
Just as we are quite unable to imagine spatial objects
outside space or temporal objects outside time, so too
there is no object that we can imagine excluded from the
possibility of combining with others.
If I can imagine objects combined in states of aﬀairs, I
cannot imagine them excluded from the possibility of
such combinations.

2.0122

Things are independent in so far as they can occur in all
possible situations, but this form of independence is a
form of connexion with states of aﬀairs, a form of
dependence. (It is impossible for words to appear in two
diﬀerent rôles: by themselves, and in propositions.)

2.0123

If I know an object I also know all its possible occurrences in states of aﬀairs.
(Every one of these possibilities must be part of the
nature of the object.)
A new possibility cannot be discovered later.

2.01231

If I am to know an object, though I need not know its
external properties, I must know all its internal
properties.
6

tractatus logico-philosophicus

2.0124

If all objects are given, then at the same time all possible
states of aﬀairs are also given.

2.013

Each thing is, as it were, in a space of possible states of
aﬀairs. This space I can imagine empty, but I cannot
imagine the thing without the space.

2.0131

A spatial object must be situated in inﬁnite space. (A
spatial point is an argument-place.)
A speck in the visual ﬁeld, though it need not be red,
must have some colour: it is, so to speak, surrounded by
colour-space. Notes must have some pitch, objects of the
sense of touch some degree of hardness, and so on.

2.014

Objects contain the possibility of all situations.

2.0141

The possibility of its occurring in states of aﬀairs is the
form of an object.

2.02

Objects are simple.

2.0201

Every statement about complexes can be resolved into
a statement about their constituents and into the
propositions that describe the complexes completely.

2.021

Objects make up the substance of the world. That is why
they cannot be composite.

2.0211

If the world had no substance, then whether a
proposition had sense would depend on whether
another proposition was true.

2.0212

In that case we could not sketch any picture of the world
(true or false).

2.022

It is obvious that an imagined world, however diﬀerent
it may be from the real one, must have something—a
form—in common with it.

2.023

Objects are just what constitute this unalterable form.
7

tractatus logico-philosophicus

2.0231

The substance of the world can only determine a form,
and not any material properties. For it is only by
means of propositions that material properties are
represented—only by the conﬁguration of objects that
they are produced.

2.023

In a manner of speaking, objects are colourless.

2.0233

If two objects have the same logical form, the only
distinction between them, apart from their external
properties, is that they are diﬀerent.

2.02331

Either a thing has properties that nothing else has, in
which case we can immediately use a description to
distinguish it from the others and refer to it; or, on the
other hand, there are several things that have the whole
set of their properties in common, in which case it is
quite impossible to indicate one of them.
For if there is nothing to distinguish a thing, I cannot
distinguish it, since otherwise it would be distinguished
after all.

2.024

Substance is what subsists independently of what is the
case.

2.025

It is form and content.

2.0251

Space, time, and colour (being coloured) are forms of
objects.

2.026

There must be objects, if the world is to have an unalterable form.

2.027

Objects, the unalterable, and the subsistent are one and
the same.

2.0271

Objects are what is unalterable and subsistent; their
conﬁguration is what is changing and unstable.

2.0272

The conﬁguration of objects produces states of aﬀairs.
8

tractatus logico-philosophicus

2.03

In a state of aﬀairs objects ﬁt into one another like the
links of a chain.

2.031

In a state of aﬀairs objects stand in a determinate relation
to one another.

2.032

The determinate way in which objects are connected
in a state of aﬀairs is the structure of the state of
aﬀairs.

2.033

Form is the possibility of structure.

2.034

The structure of a fact consists of the structures of states
of aﬀairs.

2.04

The totality of existing states of aﬀairs is the world.

2.05

The totality of existing states of aﬀairs also determines
which states of aﬀairs do not exist.

2.06

The existence and non-existence of states of aﬀairs is
reality.
(We also call the existence of states of aﬀairs a positive
fact, and their non-existence a negative fact.)

2.061

States of aﬀairs are independent of one another.

2.062

From the existence or non-existence of one state of
aﬀairs it is impossible to infer the existence or nonexistence of another.

2.063

The sum-total of reality is the world.

2.1

We picture facts to ourselves.

2.11

A picture presents a situation in logical space, the
existence and non-existence of states of aﬀairs.

2.12

A picture is a model of reality.

2.13

In a picture objects have the elements of the picture
corresponding to them.
9

tractatus logico-philosophicus

2.131

In a picture the elements of the picture are the representatives of objects.

2.14

What constitutes a picture is that its elements are related
to one another in a determinate way.

2.141

A picture is a fact.

2.15

The fact that the elements of a picture are related to one
another in a determinate way represents that things are
related to one another in the same way.
Let us call this connexion of its elements the structure
of the picture, and let us call the possibility of this structure the pictorial form of the picture.

2.151

Pictorial form is the possibility that things are related to
one another in the same way as the elements of the
picture.

2.1511

That is how a picture is attached to reality; it reaches
right out to it.

2.1512

It is laid against reality like a measure.

2.15121

Only the end-points of the graduating lines actually touch
the object that is to be measured.

2.1513

So a picture, conceived in this way, also includes the
pictorial relationship, which makes it into a picture.

2.1514

The pictorial relationship consists of the correlations of
the picture’s elements with things.

2.1515

These correlations are, as it were, the feelers of the
picture’s elements, with which the picture touches
reality.

2.16

If a fact is to be a picture, it must have something in
common with what it depicts.

2.161

There must be something identical in a picture and what
10

tractatus logico-philosophicus

it depicts, to enable the one to be a picture of the other at
all.
2.17

What a picture must have in common with reality, in
order to be able to depict it—correctly or incorrectly—
in the way it does, is its pictorial form.

2.171

A picture can depict any reality whose form it has.
A spatial picture can depict anything spatial, a
coloured one anything coloured, etc.

2.172

A picture cannot, however, depict its pictorial form: it
displays it.

2.173

A picture represents its subject from a position outside
it. (Its standpoint is its representational form.) That
is why a picture represents its subject correctly or
incorrectly.

2.174

A picture cannot, however, place itself outside its
representational form.

2.18

What any picture, of whatever form, must have in common with reality, in order to be able to depict it—
correctly or incorrectly—in any way at all, is logical
form, i.e. the form of reality.

2.181

A picture whose pictorial form is logical form is called a
logical picture.

2.182

Every picture is at the same time a logical one. (On the
other hand, not every picture is, for example, a spatial
one.)

2.19

Logical pictures can depict the world.

2.2

A picture has logico-pictorial form in common with
what it depicts.

2.201

A picture depicts reality by representing a possibility of
existence and non-existence of states of aﬀairs.
11

tractatus logico-philosophicus

2.202

A picture represents a possible situation in logical space.

2.203

A picture contains the possibility of the situation that it
represents.

2.21

A picture agrees with reality or fails to agree; it is correct
or incorrect, true or false.

2.22

What a picture represents it represents independently of
its truth or falsity, by means of its pictorial form.

2.221

What a picture represents is its sense.

2.222

The agreement or disagreement of its sense with reality
constitutes its truth or falsity.

2.223

In order to tell whether a picture is true or false we must
compare it with reality.

2.224

It is impossible to tell from the picture alone whether it
is true or false.

2.225

There are no pictures that are true a priori.

3

A logical picture of facts is a thought.

3.001

‘A state of aﬀairs is thinkable’: what this means is that we
can picture it to ourselves.

3.01

The totality of true thoughts is a picture of the world.

3.02

A thought contains the possibility of the situation
of which it is the thought. What is thinkable is possible
too.

3.03

Thought can never be of anything illogical, since, if it
were, we should have to think illogically.

3.031

It used to be said that God could create anything except
what would be contrary to the laws of logic.—The truth
is that we could not say what an ‘illogical’ world would
look like.
12

tractatus logico-philosophicus

3.032

It is as impossible to represent in language anything that
‘contradicts logic’ as it is in geometry to represent by its
co-ordinates a ﬁgure that contradicts the laws of space,
or to give the co-ordinates of a point that does not exist.

3.0321

Though a state of aﬀairs that would contravene the laws
of physics can be represented by us spatially, one that
would contravene the laws of geometry cannot.

3.04

If a thought were correct a priori, it would be a thought
whose possibility ensured its truth.

3.05

A priori knowledge that a thought was true would be
possible only if its truth were recognizable from the
thought itself (without anything to compare it with).

3.1

In a proposition a thought ﬁnds an expression that can
be perceived by the senses.

3.11

We use the perceptible sign of a proposition (spoken or
written, etc.) as a projection of a possible situation.
The method of projection is to think of the sense of
the proposition.

3.12

I call the sign with which we express a thought a propositional sign.—And a proposition is a propositional
sign in its projective relation to the world.

3.13

A proposition includes all that the projection includes,
but not what is projected.
Therefore, though what is projected is not itself
included, its possibility is.
A proposition, therefore, does not actually contain its
sense, but does contain the possibility of expressing it.
(‘The content of a proposition’ means the content of a
proposition that has sense.)
A proposition contains the form, but not the content,
of its sense.
13

tractatus logico-philosophicus

3.14

What constitutes a propositional sign is that in it its
elements (the words) stand in a determinate relation to
one another.
A propositional sign is a fact.

3.141

A proposition is not a blend of words.—(Just as a theme
in music is not a blend of notes.)
A proposition is articulate.

3.142

Only facts can express a sense, a set of names cannot.

3.143

Although a propositional sign is a fact, this is obscured
by the usual form of expression in writing or print.
For in a printed proposition, for example, no essential
diﬀerence is apparent between a propositional sign and
a word.
(That is what made it possible for Frege to call a
proposition a composite name.)

3.1431

The essence of a propositional sign is very clearly seen if
we imagine one composed of spatial objects (such as
tables, chairs, and books) instead of written signs.
Then the spatial arrangement of these things will
express the sense of the proposition.

3.1432

Instead of, ‘The complex sign “aRb” says that a stands to b
in the relation R’, we ought to put, ‘That “a” stands to “b”
in a certain relation says that aRb.’

3.144

Situations can be described but not given names.
(Names are like points; propositions like arrows—
they have sense.)

3.2

In a proposition a thought can be expressed in such a
way that elements of the propositional sign correspond
to the objects of the thought.

3.201

I call such elements ‘simple signs’, and such a
proposition ‘completely analysed’.
14

tractatus logico-philosophicus

3.202

The simple signs employed in propositions are called
names.

3.203

A name means an object. The object is its meaning. (‘A’
is the same sign as ‘A’.)

3.21

The conﬁguration of objects in a situation corresponds
to the conﬁguration of simple signs in the propositional
sign.

3.22

In a proposition a name is the representative of an
object.

3.221

Objects can only be named. Signs are their representatives.
I can only speak about them: I cannot put them into words.
Propositions can only say how things are, not what they
are.

3.23

The requirement that simple signs be possible is the
requirement that sense be determinate.

3.24

A proposition about a complex stands in an internal
relation to a proposition about a constituent of the
complex.
A complex can be given only by its description,
which will be right or wrong. A proposition that mentions a complex will not be nonsensical, if the complex
does not exist, but simply false.
When a propositional element signiﬁes a complex,
this can be seen from an indeterminateness in the propositions in which it occurs. In such cases we know that
the proposition leaves something undetermined. (In fact
the notation for generality contains a prototype.)
The contraction of a symbol for a complex into a
simple symbol can be expressed in a deﬁnition.

3.25

A proposition has one and only one complete analysis.

3.251

What a proposition expresses it expresses in a
15

tractatus logico-philosophicus

determinate manner, which can be set out clearly: a
proposition is articulate.
3.26

A name cannot be dissected any further by means of a
deﬁnition: it is a primitive sign.

3.261

Every sign that has a deﬁnition signiﬁes via the signs that
serve to deﬁne it; and the deﬁnitions point the way.
Two signs cannot signify in the same manner if one is
primitive and the other is deﬁned by means of primitive
signs. Names cannot be anatomized by means of
deﬁnitions.
(Nor can any sign that has a meaning independently
and on its own.)

3.262

What signs fail to express, their application shows. What
signs slur over, their application says clearly.

3.263

The meanings of primitive signs can be explained by
means of elucidations. Elucidations are propositions that
contain the primitive signs. So they can only be understood if the meanings of those signs are already known.

3.3

Only propositions have sense; only in the nexus of a
proposition does a name have meaning.

3.31

I call any part of a proposition that characterizes its sense
an expression (or a symbol).
(A proposition is itself an expression.)
Everything essential to their sense that propositions
can have in common with one another is an expression.
An expression is the mark of a form and a content.

3.311

An expression presupposes the forms of all the propositions in which it can occur. It is the common characteristic mark of a class of propositions.

3.312

It is therefore presented by means of the general form of
the propositions that it characterizes.
16

tractatus logico-philosophicus

In fact, in this form the expression will be constant and
everything else variable.
3.313

Thus an expression is presented by means of a variable
whose values are the propositions that contain the
expression.
(In the limiting case the variable becomes a constant,
the expression becomes a proposition.)
I call such a variable a ‘propositional variable’.

3.314

An expression has meaning only in a proposition. All
variables can be construed as propositional variables.
(Even variable names.)

3.315

If we turn a constituent of a proposition into a variable,
there is a class of propositions all of which are values of
the resulting variable proposition. In general, this class
too will be dependent on the meaning that our arbitrary
conventions have given to parts of the original proposition. But if all the signs in it that have arbitrarily
determined meanings are turned into variables, we shall
still get a class of this kind. This one, however, is not
dependent on any convention, but solely on the nature
of the proposition. It corresponds to a logical form—a
logical prototype.

3.316

What values a propositional variable may take is
something that is stipulated.
The stipulation of values is the variable.

3.317

To stipulate values for a propositional variable is to give the
propositions whose common characteristic the variable is.
The stipulation is a description of those propositions.
The stipulation will therefore be concerned only with
symbols, not with their meaning.
And the only thing essential to the stipulation is that it is
merely a description of symbols and states nothing about what is
signiﬁed.
17

tractatus logico-philosophicus

How the description of the propositions is produced
is not essential.
3.318

Like Frege and Russell I construe a proposition as a
function of the expressions contained in it.

3.32

A sign is what can be perceived of a symbol.

3.321

So one and the same sign (written or spoken, etc.) can
be common to two diﬀerent symbols—in which case
they will signify in diﬀerent ways.

3.322

Our use of the same sign to signify two diﬀerent objects
can never indicate a common characteristic of the two, if
we use it with two diﬀerent modes of signiﬁcation. For the
sign, of course, is arbitrary. So we could choose two
diﬀerent signs instead, and then what would be left in
common on the signifying side?

3.323

In everyday language it very frequently happens that the
same word has diﬀerent modes of signiﬁcation—and so
belongs to diﬀerent symbols—or that two words that
have diﬀerent modes of signiﬁcation are employed in
propositions in what is superﬁcially the same way.
Thus the word ‘is’ ﬁgures as the copula, as a sign for
identity, and as an expression for existence; ‘exist’ ﬁgures as an intransitive verb like ‘go’, and ‘identical’ as an
adjective; we speak of something, but also of something’s
happening.
(In the proposition, ‘Green is green’—where the ﬁrst
word is the proper name of a person and the last an
adjective—these words do not merely have diﬀerent
meanings: they are diﬀerent symbols.)

3.324

In this way the most fundamental confusions are easily
produced (the whole of philosophy is full of them).

3.325

In order to avoid such errors we must make use of a
18

tractatus logico-philosophicus

sign-language that excludes them by not using the
same sign for diﬀerent symbols and by not using in a
superﬁcially similar way signs that have diﬀerent modes
of signiﬁcation: that is to say, a sign-language that is
governed by logical grammar—by logical syntax.
(The conceptual notation of Frege and Russell is such
a language, though, it is true, it fails to exclude all
mistakes.)
3.326

In order to recognize a symbol by its sign we must
observe how it is used with a sense.

3.327

A sign does not determine a logical form unless it is
taken together with its logico-syntactical employment.

3.328

If a sign is useless, it is meaningless. That is the point of
Occam’s maxim.
(If everything behaves as if a sign had meaning, then
it does have meaning.)

3.33

In logical syntax the meaning of a sign should never play
a rôle. It must be possible to establish logical syntax
without mentioning the meaning of a sign: only the
description of expressions may be presupposed.

3.331

From this observation we turn to Russell’s ‘theory of
types’. It can be seen that Russell must be wrong,
because he had to mention the meaning of signs when
establishing the rules for them.

3.332

No proposition can make a statement about itself,
because a propositional sign cannot be contained in
itself (that is the whole of the ‘theory of types’).

3.333

The reason why a function cannot be its own argument
is that the sign for a function already contains the
prototype of its argument, and it cannot contain itself.
For let us suppose that the function F(fx) could be its
19

tractatus logico-philosophicus

own argument: in that case there would be a proposition
‘F(F(fx))’, in which the outer function F and the inner
function F must have diﬀerent meanings, since the inner
one has the form φ(fx) and the outer one has the form
ψ(φ(fx)). Only the letter ‘F’ is common to the two
functions, but the letter by itself signiﬁes nothing.
This immediately becomes clear if instead of ‘F(Fu)’
we write ‘(∃φ):F(φu).φu = Fu’.
That disposes of Russell’s paradox.
3.334

The rules of logical syntax must go without saying, once
we know how each individual sign signiﬁes.

3.34

A proposition possesses essential and accidental features.
Accidental features are those that result from the
particular way in which the propositional sign is produced. Essential features are those without which the
proposition could not express its sense.

3.341

So what is essential in a proposition is what all propositions that can express the same sense have in common.
And similarly, in general, what is essential in a symbol
is what all symbols that can serve the same purpose have
in common.

3.3411

So one could say that the real name of an object was
what all symbols that signiﬁed it had in common. Thus,
one by one, all kinds of composition would prove to be
unessential to a name.

3.342

Although there is something arbitrary in our notations,
this much is not arbitrary—that when we have determined
one thing arbitrarily, something else is necessarily the
case. (This derives from the essence of notation.)

3.3421

A particular mode of signifying may be unimportant but
it is always important that it is a possible mode of signifying. And that is generally so in philosophy: again and
20

tractatus logico-philosophicus

again the individual case turns out to be unimportant,
but the possibility of each individual case discloses
something about the essence of the world.
3.343

Deﬁnitions are rules for translating from one language
into another. Any correct sign-language must be translatable into any other in accordance with such rules: it is
this that they all have in common.

3.344

What signiﬁes in a symbol is what is common to all
the symbols that the rules of logical syntax allow us to
substitute for it.

3.3441

For instance, we can express what is common to all notations for truth-functions in the following way: they have
in common that, for example, the notation that uses ‘∼p’
(‘not p’) and ‘p v q’ (‘p or q’) can be substituted for any of
them.
(This serves to characterize the way in which something general can be disclosed by the possibility of a
speciﬁc notation.)

3.3442

Nor does analysis resolve the sign for a complex in an
arbitrary way, so that it would have a diﬀerent resolution
every time that it was incorporated in a diﬀerent
proposition.

3.4

A proposition determines a place in logical space. The
existence of this logical place is guaranteed by the mere
existence of the constituents—by the existence of the
proposition with a sense.

3.41

The propositional sign with logical co-ordinates—that is
the logical place.

3.411

In geometry and logic alike a place is a possibility: something can exist in it.

3.42

A proposition can determine only one place in logical
21

tractatus logico-philosophicus

space: nevertheless the whole of logical space must
already be given by it.
(Otherwise negation, logical sum, logical product,
etc.; would introduce more and more new elements—in
co-ordination.)
(The logical scaﬀolding surrounding a picture determines logical space. The force of a proposition reaches
through the whole of logical space.)
3.5

A propositional sign, applied and thought out, is a
thought.

4

A thought is a proposition with a sense.

4.001

The totality of propositions is language.

4.002

Man possesses the ability to construct languages capable
of expressing every sense, without having any idea how
each word has meaning or what its meaning is—just as
people speak without knowing how the individual
sounds are produced.
Everyday language is a part of the human organism
and is no less complicated than it.
It is not humanly possible to gather immediately from
it what the logic of language is.
Language disguises thought. So much so, that from
the outward form of the clothing it is impossible to infer
the form of the thought beneath it, because the outward
form of the clothing is not designed to reveal the form
of the body, but for entirely diﬀerent purposes.
The tacit conventions on which the understanding
of everyday language depends are enormously complicated.

4.003

Most of the propositions and questions to be found in
philosophical works are not false but nonsensical. Consequently we cannot give any answer to questions of this
22

tractatus logico-philosophicus

kind, but can only point out that they are nonsensical.
Most of the propositions and questions of philosophers
arise from our failure to understand the logic of our
language.
(They belong to the same class as the question
whether the good is more or less identical than the
beautiful.)
And it is not surprising that the deepest problems are
in fact not problems at all.
4.0031

All philosophy is a ‘critique of language’ (though not in
Mauthner’s sense). It was Russell who performed the
service of showing that the apparent logical form of a
proposition need not be its real one.

4.01

A proposition is a picture of reality.
A proposition is a model of reality as we imagine it.

4.011

At ﬁrst sight a proposition—one set out on the printed
page, for example—does not seem to be a picture of
the reality with which it is concerned. But neither do
written notes seem at ﬁrst sight to be a picture of a piece
of music, nor our phonetic notation (the alphabet) to be
a picture of our speech.
And yet these sign-languages prove to be pictures,
even in the ordinary sense, of what they represent.

4.012

It is obvious that a proposition of the form ‘aRb’ strikes
us as a picture. In this case the sign is obviously a
likeness of what is signiﬁed.

4.013

And if we penetrate to the essence of this pictorial character, we see that it is not impaired by apparent irregularities
(such as the use of  and  in musical notation).
For even these irregularities depict what they are
intended to express; only they do it in a diﬀerent way.

4.014

A gramophone record, the musical idea, the written
23

tractatus logico-philosophicus

notes, and the sound-waves, all stand to one another in
the same internal relation of depicting that holds
between language and the world.
They are all constructed according to a common
logical pattern.
(Like the two youths in the fairy-tale, their two
horses, and their lilies. They are all in a certain sense
one.)
4.0141

There is a general rule by means of which the musician
can obtain the symphony from the score, and which
makes it possible to derive the symphony from the
groove on the gramophone record, and, using the ﬁrst
rule, to derive the score again. That is what constitutes
the inner similarity between these things which seem to
be constructed in such entirely diﬀerent ways. And that
rule is the law of projection which projects the symphony into the language of musical notation. It is the
rule for translating this language into the language of
gramophone records.

4.015

The possibility of all imagery, of all our pictorial modes
of expression, is contained in the logic of depiction.

4.016

In order to understand the essential nature of a
proposition, we should consider hieroglyphic script,
which depicts the facts that it describes.
And alphabetic script developed out of it without
losing what was essential to depiction.

4.02

We can see this from the fact that we understand the
sense of a propositional sign without its having been
explained to us.

4.021

A proposition is a picture of reality: for if I understand a
proposition, I know the situation that it represents. And I
understand the proposition without having had its sense
explained to me.
24

tractatus logico-philosophicus

4.022

A proposition shows its sense.
A proposition shows how things stand if it is true. And
it says that they do so stand.

4.023

A proposition must restrict reality to two alternatives:
yes or no.
In order to do that, it must describe reality
completely.
A proposition is a description of a state of aﬀairs.
Just as a description of an object describes it by giving
its external properties, so a proposition describes reality
by its internal properties.
A proposition constructs a world with the help
of a logical scaﬀolding, so that one can actually see
from the proposition how everything stands logically
if it is true. One can draw inferences from a false
proposition.

4.024

To understand a proposition means to know what is the
case if it is true.
(One can understand it, therefore, without knowing
whether it is true.)
It is understood by anyone who understands its
constituents.

4.025

When translating one language into another, we do not
proceed by translating each proposition of the one into a
proposition of the other, but merely by translating the
constituents of propositions.
(And the dictionary translates not only substantives,
but also verbs, adjectives, and conjunctions, etc.; and it
treats them all in the same way.)

4.026

The meanings of simple signs (words) must be
explained to us if we are to understand them.
With propositions, however, we make ourselves
understood.
25

tractatus logico-philosophicus

4.027

It belongs to the essence of a proposition that it should
be able to communicate a new sense to us.

4.03

A proposition must use old expressions to communicate
a new sense.
A proposition communicates a situation to us, and so
it must be essentially connected with the situation.
And the connexion is precisely that it is its logical
picture.
A proposition states something only in so far as it is a
picture.

4.031

In a proposition a situation is, as it were, constructed by
way of experiment.
Instead of, ‘This proposition has such and such a
sense’, we can simply say, ‘This proposition represents
such and such a situation’.

4.0311

One name stands for one thing, another for another
thing, and they are combined with one another. In this
way the whole group—like a tableau vivant—presents a
state of aﬀairs.

4.0312

The possibility of propositions is based on the principle
that objects have signs as their representatives.
My fundamental idea is that the ‘logical constants’ are
not representatives; that there can be no representatives
of the logic of facts.

4.032

It is only in so far as a proposition is logically articulated
that it is a picture of a situation.
(Even the proposition, ‘Ambulo’, is composite: for its
stem with a diﬀerent ending yields a diﬀerent sense, and
so does its ending with a diﬀerent stem.)

4.04

In a proposition there must be exactly as many distinguishable parts as in the situation that it represents.
The two must possess the same logical (mathemati26

tractatus logico-philosophicus

cal) multiplicity. (Compare Hertz’s Mechanics on
dynamical models.)
4.041

This mathematical multiplicity, of course, cannot itself
be the subject of depiction. One cannot get away from it
when depicting.

4.0411

If, for example, we wanted to express what we now
write as ‘(x).fx’ by putting an aﬃx in front of ‘fx’—for
instance by writing ‘Gen. fx’—it would not be adequate:
we should not know what was being generalized. If we
wanted to signalize it with an aﬃx ‘g’—for instance by
writing ‘f(xg)’—that would not be adequate either: we
should not know the scope of the generality-sign.
If we were to try to do it by introducing a mark into
the argument-pieces—for instance by writing
‘(G,G).F(G,G)’
—it would not be adequate: we should not be able to
establish the identity of the variables. And so on.
All these modes of signifying are inadequate because
they lack the necessary mathematical multiplicity.

4.0412

For the same reason the idealist’s appeal to ‘spatial
spectacles’ is inadequate to explain the seeing of spatial
relations, because it cannot explain the multiplicity of
these relations.

4.05

Reality is compared with propositions.

4.06

A proposition can be true or false only in virtue of being
a picture of reality.

4.061

It must not be overlooked that a proposition has a sense
that is independent of the facts: otherwise one can easily
suppose that true and false are relations of equal status
between signs and what they signify.
In that case one could say, for example, that ‘p’
27

tractatus logico-philosophicus

signiﬁed in the true way what ‘∼p’ signiﬁed in the false
way, etc.
4.062

Can we not make ourselves understood with false propositions just as we have done up till now with true
ones?—So long as it is known that they are meant to be
false.—No! For a proposition is true if we use it to say
that things stand in a certain way, and they do; and if by
‘p’ we mean ∼p and things stand as we mean that they
do, then, construed in the new way, ‘p’ is true and not
false.

4.0621

But it is important that the signs ‘p’ and ‘∼p’ can say the
same thing. For it shows that nothing in reality
corresponds to the sign ‘∼’.
The occurrence of negation in a proposition is not
enough to characterize its sense (∼∼p = p).
The propositions ‘p’ and ‘∼p’ have opposite sense, but
there corresponds to them one and the same reality.

4.063

An analogy to illustrate the concept of truth: imagine a
black spot on white paper: you can describe the shape of
the spot by saying, for each point on the sheet, whether
it is black or white. To the fact that a point is black there
corresponds a positive fact, and to the fact that a point is
white (not black), a negative fact. If I designate a point
on the sheet (a truth-value according to Frege), then this
corresponds to the supposition that is put forward for
judgement, etc. etc.
But in order to be able to say that a point is black or
white, I must ﬁrst know when a point is called black,
and when white: in order to be able to say, ‘ “p” is true
(or false)’, I must have determined in what circumstances I call ‘p’ true, and in so doing I determine the
sense of the proposition.
Now the point where the simile breaks down is this:
28

tractatus logico-philosophicus

we can indicate a point on the paper even if we do not
know what black and white are, but if a proposition has
no sense, nothing corresponds to it, since it does not
designate a thing (a truth-value) which might have
properties called ‘false’ or ‘true’. The verb of a proposition is not ‘is true’ or ‘is false’, as Frege thought: rather,
that which ‘is true’ must already contain the verb.
4.064

Every proposition must already have a sense: it cannot be
given a sense by aﬃrmation. Indeed its sense is just what
is aﬃrmed. And the same applies to negation, etc.

4.0641

One could say that negation must be related to the
logical place determined by the negated proposition.
The negating proposition determines a logical place
diﬀerent from that of the negated proposition.
The negating proposition determines a logical place
with the help of the logical place of the negated proposition. For it describes it as lying outside the latter’s
logical place.
The negated proposition can be negated again, and
this in itself shows that what is negated is already a
proposition, and not merely something that is preliminary to a proposition.

4.1

Propositions represent the existence and non-existence
of states of aﬀairs.

4.11

The totality of true propositions is the whole of natural
science (or the whole corpus of the natural sciences).

4.111

Philosophy is not one of the natural sciences.
(The word ‘philosophy’ must mean something whose
place is above or below the natural sciences, not beside
them.)

4.112

Philosophy aims at the logical clariﬁcation of thoughts.
Philosophy is not a body of doctrine but an activity.
29

tractatus logico-philosophicus

A philosophical work consists essentially of
elucidations.
Philosophy does not result in ‘philosophical propositions’, but rather in the clariﬁcation of propositions.
Without philosophy thoughts are, as it were, cloudy
and indistinct: its task is to make them clear and to give
them sharp boundaries.
4.1121

Psychology is no more closely related to philosophy
than any other natural science.
Theory of knowledge is the philosophy of psychology.
Does not my study of sign-language correspond to the
study of thought-processes, which philosophers used to
consider so essential to the philosophy of logic? Only in
most cases they got entangled in unessential psychological investigations, and with my method too there is
an analogous risk.

4.1122

Darwin’s theory has no more to do with philosophy
than any other hypothesis in natural science.

4.113

Philosophy sets limits to the much disputed sphere of
natural science.

4.114

It must set limits to what can be thought; and, in doing
so, to what cannot be thought.
It must set limits to what cannot be thought by
working outwards through what can be thought.

4.115

It will signify what cannot be said, by presenting clearly
what can be said.

4.116

Everything that can be thought at all can be thought
clearly. Everything that can be put into words can be put
clearly.

4.12

Propositions can represent the whole of reality, but they
30

tractatus logico-philosophicus

cannot represent what they must have in common with
reality in order to be able to represent it—logical form.
In order to be able to represent logical form, we
should have to be able to station ourselves with propositions somewhere outside logic, that is to say outside the
world.
4.121

Propositions cannot represent logical form: it is
mirrored in them.
What ﬁnds its reﬂection in language, language cannot
represent.
What expresses itself in language, we cannot express by
means of language.
Propositions show the logical form of reality.
They display it.

4.1211

Thus one proposition ‘fa’ shows that the object a occurs
in its sense, two propositions ‘fa’ and ‘ga’ show that the
same object is mentioned in both of them.
If two propositions contradict one another, then their
structure shows it; the same is true if one of them
follows from the other. And so on.

4.1212

What can be shown, cannot be said.

4.1213

Now, too, we understand our feeling that once we
have a sign-language in which everything is all right, we
already have a correct logical point of view.

4.122

In a certain sense we can talk about formal properties of
objects and states of aﬀairs, or, in the case of facts, about
structural properties: and in the same sense about formal
relations and structural relations.
(Instead of ‘structural property’ I also say ‘internal
property’; instead of ‘structural relation’, ‘internal
relation’.
I introduce these expressions in order to indicate the
source of the confusion between internal relations and
31

tractatus logico-philosophicus

relations proper (external relations), which is very
widespread among philosophers.)
It is impossible, however, to assert by means of
propositions that such internal properties and relations
obtain: rather, this makes itself manifest in the propositions that represent the relevant states of aﬀairs and are
concerned with the relevant objects.
4.1221

An internal property of a fact can also be called a feature
of that fact (in the sense in which we speak of facial
features, for example).

4.123

A property is internal if it is unthinkable that its object
should not possess it.
(This shade of blue and that one stand, eo ipso, in the
internal relation of lighter to darker. It is unthinkable
that these two objects should not stand in this relation.)
(Here the shifting use of the word ‘object’ corresponds to the shifting use of the words ‘property’ and
‘relation’.)

4.124

The existence of an internal property of a possible situation is not expressed by means of a proposition: rather,
it expresses itself in the proposition representing the
situation, by means of an internal property of that
proposition.
It would be just as nonsensical to assert that a
proposition had a formal property as to deny it.

4.1241

It is impossible to distinguish forms from one another
by saying that one has this property and another that
property: for this presupposes that it makes sense to
ascribe either property to either form.

4.125

The existence of an internal relation between possible
situations expresses itself in language by means of an
internal relation between the propositions representing
them.
32

tractatus logico-philosophicus

4.1251

Here we have the answer to the vexed question ‘whether
all relations are internal or external’.

4.1252

I call a series that is ordered by an internal relation a series
of forms.
The order of the number-series is not governed by an
external relation but by an internal relation.
The same is true of the series of propositions
‘aRb’,
‘(∃x):aRx.xRb’,
‘(∃x, y):aRx.xRy.yRb’,
and so forth.
(If b stands in one of these relations to a, I call b a
successor of a.)

4.126

We can now talk about formal concepts, in the same
sense that we speak of formal properties.
(I introduce this expression in order to exhibit the
source of the confusion between formal concepts
and concepts proper, which pervades the whole of
traditional logic.)
When something falls under a formal concept as one
of its objects, this cannot be expressed by means of a
proposition. Instead it is shown in the very sign for this
object. (A name shows that it signiﬁes an object, a sign
for a number that it signiﬁes a number, etc.)
Formal concepts cannot, in fact, be represented by
means of a function, as concepts proper can.
For their characteristics, formal properties, are not
expressed by means of functions.
The expression for a formal property is a feature of
certain symbols.
So the sign for the characteristics of a formal concept
is a distinctive feature of all symbols whose meanings
fall under the concept.
33

tractatus logico-philosophicus

So the expression for a formal concept is a propositional variable in which this distinctive feature alone
is constant.
4.127

The propositional variable signiﬁes the formal concept,
and its values signify the objects that fall under the
concept.

4.1271

Every variable is the sign for a formal concept.
For every variable represents a constant form that all
its values possess, and this can be regarded as a formal
property of those values.

4.1272

Thus the variable name ‘x’ is the proper sign for the
pseudo-concept object.
Wherever the word ‘object’ (‘thing’, etc.) is correctly
used, it is expressed in conceptual notation by a variable
name.
For example, in the proposition, ‘There are 2 objects
which. . .’, it is expressed by ‘(∃x, y). . .’.
Wherever it is used in a diﬀerent way, that is as a
proper concept-word, nonsensical pseudo-propositions
are the result.
So one cannot say, for example, ‘There are objects’, as
one might say, ‘There are books’. And it is just as impossible to say, ‘There are 100 objects’, or, ‘There are ℵ0
objects’.
And it is nonsensical to speak of the total number of
objects.
The same applies to the words ‘complex’, ‘fact’,
‘function’, ‘number’, etc.
They all signify formal concepts, and are represented
in conceptual notation by variables, not by functions or
classes (as Frege and Russell believed).
‘1 is a number’, ‘There is only one zero’, and all
similar expressions are nonsensical.
34

tractatus logico-philosophicus

(It is just as nonsensical to say, ‘There is only one 1’,
as it would be to say, ‘2+2 at 3 o’clock equals 4’.)
4.12721

A formal concept is given immediately any object falling
under it is given. It is not possible, therefore, to introduce as primitive ideas objects belonging to a formal
concept and the formal concept itself. So it is impossible,
for example, to introduce as primitive ideas both the
concept of a function and speciﬁc functions, as Russell
does; or the concept of a number and particular
numbers.

4.1273

If we want to express in conceptual notation the general
proposition, ‘b is a successor of a’, then we require an
expression for the general term of the series of forms
aRb,
(∃x):aRx.xRb,
(∃x, y):aRx.xRy.yRb,
....
In order to express the general term of a series of
forms, we must use a variable, because the concept ‘term
of that series of forms’ is a formal concept. (This is what
Frege and Russell overlooked: consequently the way in
which they want to express general propositions like the
one above is incorrect; it contains a vicious circle.)
We can determine the general term of a series of
forms by giving its ﬁrst term and the general form of
the operation that produces the next term out of the
proposition that precedes it.

4.1274

To ask whether a formal concept exists is nonsensical.
For no proposition can be the answer to such a question.
(So, for example, the question, ‘Are there unanalysable subject-predicate propositions?’ cannot be asked.)

4.128

Logical forms are without number.
35

tractatus logico-philosophicus

Hence there are no pre-eminent numbers in logic,
and hence there is no possibility of philosophical
monism or dualism, etc.
4.2

The sense of a proposition is its agreement and
disagreement with possibilities of existence and
non-existence of states of aﬀairs.

4.21

The simplest kind of proposition, an elementary
proposition, asserts the existence of a state of aﬀairs.

4.211

It is a sign of a proposition’s being elementary that there
can be no elementary proposition contradicting it.

4.22

An elementary proposition consists of names. It is a
nexus, a concatenation, of names.

4.221

It is obvious that the analysis of propositions must bring
us to elementary propositions which consist of names in
immediate combination.
This raises the question how such combination into
propositions comes about.

4.2211

Even if the world is inﬁnitely complex, so that every fact
consists of inﬁnitely many states of aﬀairs and every state
of aﬀairs is composed of inﬁnitely many objects, there
would still have to be objects and states of aﬀairs.

4.23

It is only in the nexus of an elementary proposition that
a name occurs in a proposition.

4.24

Names are the simple symbols: I indicate them by single
letters (‘x’, ‘y’, ‘z’).
I write elementary propositions as functions of
names, so that they have the form ‘fx’, ‘φ(x,y)’, etc.
Or I indicate them by the letters ‘p’, ‘q’, ‘r’.

4.241

When I use two signs with one and the same meaning, I
express this by putting the sign ‘=’ between them.
36

tractatus logico-philosophicus

So ‘a = b’ means that the sign ‘b’ can be substituted for
the sign ‘a’.
(If I use an equation to introduce a new sign ‘b’, laying down that it shall serve as a substitute for a sign ‘a’
that is already known, then, like Russell, I write the
equation—deﬁnition—in the form ‘a = b Def.’ A
deﬁnition is a rule dealing with signs.)
4.242

Expressions of the form ‘a = b’ are, therefore, mere representational devices. They state nothing about the
meaning of the signs ‘a’ and ‘b’.

4.243

Can we understand two names without knowing
whether they signify the same thing or two diﬀerent
things?—Can we understand a proposition in which
two names occur without knowing whether their
meaning is the same or diﬀerent?
Suppose I know the meaning of an English word and
of a German word that means the same: then it is
impossible for me to be unaware that they do mean the
same; I must be capable of translating each into the
other.
Expressions like ‘a = a’, and those derived from them,
are neither elementary propositions nor is there any
other way in which they have sense. (This will become
evident later.)

4.25

If an elementary proposition is true, the state of aﬀairs
exists: if an elementary proposition is false, the state of
aﬀairs does not exist.

4.26

If all true elementary propositions are given, the result
is a complete description of the world. The world is
completely described by giving all elementary propositions, and adding which of them are true and which
false.
37

tractatus logico-philosophicus
n

4.27

For n states of aﬀairs, there are Kn =

冱 冢v冣 possibilities of
n

v=0

existence and non-existence.
Of these states of aﬀairs any combination can exist
and the remainder not exist.
4.28

There correspond to these combinations the same
number of possibilities of truth—and falsity—for n
elementary propositions.

4.3

Truth-possibilities of elementary propositions mean
possibilities of existence and non-existence of states of
aﬀairs.

4.31

We can represent truth-possibilities by schemata of the
following kind (‘T’ means ‘true’, ‘F’ means ‘false’; the
rows of ‘T’s’ and ‘F’s’ under the row of elementary propositions symbolize their truth-possibilities in a way
that can easily be understood):
p
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
F

q
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F

r
T
T
T
F,
T
F
F
F

p
T
F
T
F

q
T
T,
F
F

p
T.
F

4.4

A proposition is an expression of agreement and disagreement with truth-possibilities of elementary
propositions.

4.41

Truth-possibilities of elementary propositions are the
conditions of the truth and falsity of propositions.
38

tractatus logico-philosophicus

4.411

It immediately strikes one as probable that the introduction of elementary propositions provides the basis
for understanding all other kinds of proposition. Indeed
the understanding of general propositions palpably
depends on the understanding of elementary propositions.
Kn

4.42

For n elementary propositions there are

冱 冢κ冣 = L
Kn

n

k=0

ways in which a proposition can agree and disagree with
their truth-possibilities
4.43

We can express agreement with truth-possibilities by
correlating the mark ‘T’ (true) with them in the schema.
The absence of this mark means disagreement.

4.431

The expression of agreement and disagreement with the
truth-possibilities of elementary propositions expresses
the truth-conditions of a proposition.
A proposition is the expression of its truthconditions.
(Thus Frege was quite right to use them as a starting
point when he explained the signs of his conceptual
notation. But the explanation of the concept of truth that
Frege gives is mistaken: if ‘the true’ and ‘the false’ were
really objects, and were the arguments in ∼p etc., then
Frege’s method of determining the sense of ‘∼p’ would
leave it absolutely undetermined.)

4.44

The sign that results from correlating the mark ‘T’
with truth-possibilities is a propositional sign.

4.441

It is clear that a complex of the signs ‘F’ and ‘T’ has no
object (or complex of objects) corresponding to it, just
as there is none corresponding to the horizontal and
vertical lines or to the brackets.—There are no ‘logical
objects’.
39

tractatus logico-philosophicus

Of course the same applies to all signs that express
what the schemata of ‘T’s’ and ‘F’s’ express.
4.442

For example, the following is a propositional sign:
‘p
T
F
T
F

q
’
T T
T T
F
F T.

(Frege’s ‘judgement-stroke’ ‘|–’ is logically quite
meaningless: in the works of Frege (and Russell) it simply indicates that these authors hold the propositions
marked with this sign to be true. Thus ‘|–’ is no more
a component part of a proposition than is, for instance,
the proposition’s number. It is quite impossible for a
proposition to state that it itself is true.)
If the order of the truth-possibilities in a schema is
ﬁxed once and for all by a combinatory rule, then the
last column by itself will be an expression of the truthconditions. If we now write this column as a row, the
propositional sign will become
‘(TT-T) (p,q)’
or more explicitly
‘(TTFT) (p,q)’.
(The number of places in the left-hand pair of
brackets is determined by the number of terms in the
right-hand pair.)
4.45

For n elementary propositions there are Ln possible
groups of truth-conditions.
The groups of truth-conditions that are obtainable
40

tractatus logico-philosophicus

from the truth-possibilities of a given number of
elementary propositions can be arranged in a series.
4.46

Among the possible groups of truth-conditions there are
two extreme cases.
In one of these cases the proposition is true for all the
truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions. We
say that the truth-conditions are tautological.
In the second case the proposition is false for all the
truth-possibilities: the truth-conditions are contradictory.
In the ﬁrst case we call the proposition a tautology; in
the second, a contradiction.

4.461

Propositions show what they say: tautologies and
contradictions show that they say nothing.
A tautology has no truth-conditions, since it is
unconditionally true: and a contradiction is true on no
condition.
Tautologies and contradictions lack sense.
(Like a point from which two arrows go out in
opposite directions to one another.)
(For example, I know nothing about the weather
when I know that it is either raining or not raining.)

4.4611

Tautologies and contradictions are not, however, nonsensical. They are part of the symbolism, much as ‘0’ is
part of the symbolism of arithmetic.

4.462

Tautologies and contradictions are not pictures of reality.
They do not represent any possible situations. For the
former admit all possible situations, and the latter none.
In a tautology the conditions of agreement with the
world—the representational relations—cancel one
another, so that it does not stand in any representational
relation to reality.

4.463

The truth-conditions of a proposition determine the
range that it leaves open to the facts.
41

tractatus logico-philosophicus

(A proposition, a picture, or a model is, in the negative sense, like a solid body that restricts the freedom of
movement of others, and, in the positive sense, like a
space bounded by solid substance in which there is
room for a body.)
A tautology leaves open to reality the whole—the
inﬁnite whole—of logical space: a contradiction ﬁlls the
whole of logical space leaving no point of it for reality.
Thus neither of them can determine reality in any way.
4.464

A tautology’s truth is certain, a proposition’s possible, a
contradiction’s impossible.
(Certain, possible, impossible: here we have the ﬁrst
indication of the scale that we need in the theory of
probability.)

4.465

The logical product of a tautology and a proposition
says the same thing as the proposition. This product,
therefore, is identical with the proposition. For it is
impossible to alter what is essential to a symbol without
altering its sense.

4.466

What corresponds to a determinate logical combination
of signs is a determinate logical combination of their
meanings. It is only to the uncombined signs that
absolutely any combination corresponds.
In other words, propositions that are true for every
situation cannot be combinations of signs at all, since, if
they were, only determinate combinations of objects
could correspond to them.
(And what is not a logical combination has no
combination of objects corresponding to it.)
Tautology and contradiction are the limiting cases—
indeed the disintegration—of the combination of signs.

4.4661

Admittedly the signs are still combined with one
another even in tautologies and contradictions—i.e. they
42

tractatus logico-philosophicus

stand in certain relations to one another: but these relations have no meaning, they are not essential to the
symbol.
4.5

It now seems possible to give the most general propositional form: that is, to give a description of the propositions of any sign-language whatsoever in such a way
that every possible sense can be expressed by a symbol
satisfying the description, and every symbol satisfying
the description can express a sense, provided that the
meanings of the names are suitably chosen.
It is clear that only what is essential to the most general
propositional form may be included in its description—
for otherwise it would not be the most general form.
The existence of a general propositional form is
proved by the fact that there cannot be a proposition
whose form could not have been foreseen (i.e. constructed). The general form of a proposition is: This is
how things stand.

4.51

Suppose that I am given all elementary propositions:
then I can simply ask what propositions I can construct
out of them. And there I have all propositions, and that
ﬁxes their limits.

4.52

Propositions comprise all that follows from the totality
of all elementary propositions (and, of course, from its
being the totality of them all). (Thus, in a certain sense,
it could be said that all propositions were generalizations
of elementary propositions.)

4.53

The general propositional form is a variable.

5

A proposition is a truth-function of elementary propositions.
(An elementary proposition is a truth-function of
itself.)
43

tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.01

Elementary propositions are the truth-arguments of
propositions.

5.02

The arguments of functions are readily confused with
the aﬃxes of names. For both arguments and aﬃxes
enable me to recognize the meaning of the signs containing them.
For example, when Russell writes ‘+c’, the ‘c’ is an
aﬃx which indicates that the sign as a whole is the
addition-sign for cardinal numbers. But the use of this
sign is the result of arbitrary convention and it would be
quite possible to choose a simple sign instead of ‘+c’; in
‘∼p’, however, ‘p’ is not an aﬃx but an argument: the
sense of ‘∼p’ cannot be understood unless the sense of ‘p’
has been understood already. (In the name Julius Caesar
‘Julius’ is an aﬃx. An aﬃx is always part of a description
of the object to whose name we attach it: e.g. the Caesar
of the Julian gens.)
If I am not mistaken, Frege’s theory about the meaning of propositions and functions is based on the confusion between an argument and an aﬃx. Frege regarded
the propositions of logic as names, and their arguments
as the aﬃxes of those names.

5.1

Truth-functions can be arranged in series.
That is the foundation of the theory of probability.

5.101

The truth-functions of a given number of elementary
propositions can always be set out in a schema of the
following kind:
(T T T T) (p, q) Tautology (If p then p, and if q then q.) (p ⊃ p . q ⊃ q)
(F T T T) (p, q) In words: Not both p and q. (∼(p . q))
(T F T T) (p, q) ,, ,, : If q then p. (q ⊃ p)
(T T F T) (p, q) ,, ,, : If p then q. (p ⊃ q)
(T T T F) (p, q) ,, ,, : p or q. (p v q)
(F F T T) (p, q) ,, ,, : Not q. (∼q)
(F T F T) (p, q) ,, ,, : Not p. (∼p)
(F T T F) (p, q) ,, ,, : p or q, but not both. (p . ∼q : v : q . ∼p)
(T F F T) (p, q) ,, ,, : If p then q, and if q then p. (p ≡ q)
(T F T F) (p, q) ,, ,, : p

44

tractatus logico-philosophicus
(T T F F)
(F F F T)
(F F T F)
(F T F F)
(T F F F)
(F F F F)

(p, q) ,, ,, : q
(p, q) ,, ,, : Neither p nor q. (∼P .~q or p q)
(p, q) ,, ,, : p and not q. (p . ~q)
(p, q) ,, ,, : q and not p. (q . ∼p)
(p, q) ,, ,, : q and p. (q . p)
(p, q) Contradiction (p and not p, and q and not q.) (p . ∼p . q . ∼q)

I will give the name truth-grounds of a proposition to
those truth-possibilities of its truth-arguments that
make it true.
5.11

If all the truth-grounds that are common to a number of
propositions are at the same time truth-grounds of a
certain proposition, then we say that the truth of that
proposition follows from the truth of the others.

5.12

In particular, the truth of a proposition ‘p’ follows
from the truth of another proposition ‘q’ if all the
truth-grounds of the latter are truth-grounds of the
former.

5.121

The truth-grounds of the one are contained in those of
the other: p follows from q.

5.122

If p follows from q, the sense of ‘p’ is contained in the
sense of ‘q’.

5.123

If a god creates a world in which certain propositions are
true, then by that very act he also creates a world in
which all the propositions that follow from them come
true. And similarly he could not create a world in which
the proposition ‘p’ was true without creating all its
objects.

5.124

A proposition aﬃrms every proposition that follows
from it.

5.1241

‘p. q’ is one of the propositions that aﬃrm ‘p’ and at the
same time one of the propositions that aﬃrm ‘q’.
Two propositions are opposed to one another if there
is no proposition with a sense, that aﬃrms them both.
45

tractatus logico-philosophicus

Every proposition that contradicts another negates it.
5.13

When the truth of one proposition follows from the
truth of others, we can see this from the structure of the
propositions.

5.131

If the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of
others, this ﬁnds expression in relations in which the
forms of the propositions stand to one another: nor is it
necessary for us to set up these relations between them,
by combining them with one another in a single proposition; on the contrary, the relations are internal, and
their existence is an immediate result of the existence of
the propositions.

5.1311

When we infer q from p v q and ∼p, the relation between
the propositional forms of ‘p v q’ and ‘∼p’ is masked, in
this case, by our mode of signifying. But if instead of ‘p v
q’ we write, for example, ‘p|q.|.p|q’, and instead of ‘∼p’,
‘p|p’ (p|q = neither p nor q), then the inner connexion
becomes obvious.
(The possibility of inference from (x).fx to fa shows
that the symbol (x).fx itself has generality in it.)

5.132

If p follows from q, I can make an inference from q to p,
deduce p from q.
The nature of the inference can be gathered only from
the two propositions.
They themselves are the only possible justiﬁcation of
the inference.
‘Laws of inference’, which are supposed to justify
inferences, as in the works of Frege and Russell, have no
sense, and would be superﬂuous.

5.133

All deductions are made a priori.

5.134

One elementary proposition cannot be deduced from
another.
46

tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.135

There is no possible way of making an inference from
the existence of one situation to the existence of another,
entirely diﬀerent situation.

5.136

There is no causal nexus to justify such an inference.

5.1361

We cannot infer the events of the future from those of the
present.
Superstition is nothing but belief in the causal nexus.

5.1362

The freedom of the will consists in the impossibility of
knowing actions that still lie in the future. We could
know them only if causality were an inner necessity like
that of logical inference.—The connexion between
knowledge and what is known is that of logical
necessity.
(‘A knows that p is the case’, has no sense if p is a
tautology.)

5.1363

If the truth of a proposition does not follow from the fact
that it is self-evident to us, then its self-evidence in no
way justiﬁes our belief in its truth.

5.14

If one proposition follows from another, then the latter
says more than the former, and the former less than the
latter.

5.141

If p follows from q and q from p, then they are one and
the same proposition.

5.142

A tautology follows from all propositions: it says
nothing.

5.143

Contradiction is that common factor of propositions
which no proposition has in common with another.
Tautology is the common factor of all propositions that
have nothing in common with one another.
Contradiction, one might say, vanishes outside all
propositions: tautology vanishes inside them.
47

tractatus logico-philosophicus

Contradiction is the outer limit of propositions:
tautology is the unsubstantial point at their centre.
5.15

If Tr is the number of the truth-grounds of a proposition
‘r’, and if Trs is the number of the truth-grounds of a
proposition ‘s’ that are at the same time truth-grounds of
‘r’, then we call the ratio Trs: Tr the degree of probability that
the proposition ‘r’ gives to the proposition ‘s’.

5.151

In a schema like the one above in 5.101, let Tr be the
number of ‘T’s’ in the proposition r, and let Trs be the
number of ‘T’s’ in the proposition s that stand in columns
in which the proposition r has ‘T’s’. Then the proposition
r gives to the proposition s the probability Trs: Tr.

5.1511

There is no special object peculiar to probability
propositions.

5.152

When propositions have no truth-arguments in common with one another, we call them independent of one
another.
Two elementary propositions give one another the
probability –¹².
If p follows from q, then the proposition ‘q’ gives to
the proposition ‘p’ the probability 1. The certainty of
logical inference is a limiting case of probability.
(Application of this to tautology and contradiction.)

5.153

In itself, a proposition is neither probable nor improbable. Either an event occurs or it does not: there is no
middle way.

5.154

Suppose that an urn contains black and white balls in
equal numbers (and none of any other kind). I draw one
ball after another, putting them back into the urn. By this
experiment I can establish that the number of black
balls drawn and the number of white balls drawn
approximate to one another as the draw continues.
48

tractatus logico-philosophicus

So this is not a mathematical truth.
Now, if I say, ‘The probability of my drawing a white
ball is equal to the probability of my drawing a black
one’, this means that all the circumstances that I know of
(including the laws of nature assumed as hypotheses)
give no more probability to the occurrence of the one
event than to that of the other. That is to say, they give
each the probability –¹², as can easily be gathered from the
above deﬁnitions.
What I conﬁrm by the experiment is that the
occurrence of the two events is independent of the circumstances of which I have no more detailed
knowledge.
5.155

The minimal unit for a probability proposition is this:
The circumstances—of which I have no further
knowledge—give such and such a degree of probability
to the occurrence of a particular event.

5.156

It is in this way that probability is a generalization.
It involves a general description of a propositional
form.
We use probability only in default of certainty—if our
knowledge of a fact is not indeed complete, but we do
know something about its form.
(A proposition may well be an incomplete picture of a
certain situation, but it is always a complete picture of
something.)
A probability proposition is a sort of excerpt from
other propositions.

5.2

The structures of propositions stand in internal relations
to one another.

5.21

In order to give prominence to these internal relations
we can adopt the following mode of expression: we can
represent a proposition as the result of an operation that
49

tractatus logico-philosophicus

produces it out of other propositions (which are the
bases of the operation).
5.22

An operation is the expression of a relation between the
structures of its result and of its bases.

5.23

The operation is what has to be done to the one
proposition in order to make the other out of it.

5.231

And that will, of course, depend on their formal
properties, on the internal similarity of their forms.

5.232

The internal relation by which a series is ordered is
equivalent to the operation that produces one term from
another.

5.233

Operations cannot make their appearance before the
point at which one proposition is generated out of
another in a logically meaningful way; i.e. the point at
which the logical construction of propositions begins.

5.234

Truth-functions of elementary propositions are results
of operations with elementary propositions as bases.
(These operations I call truth-operations.)

5.2341

The sense of a truth-function of p is a function of the
sense of p.
Negation, logical addition, logical multiplication, etc.
etc. are operations.
(Negation reverses the sense of a proposition.)

5.24

An operation manifests itself in a variable; it shows how
we can get from one form of proposition to another.
It gives expression to the diﬀerence between the
forms.
(And what the bases of an operation and its result
have in common is just the bases themselves.)

5.241

An operation is not the mark of a form, but only of a
diﬀerence between forms.
50

tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.242

The operation that produces ‘q’ from ‘p’ also produces ‘r’
from ‘q’, and so on. There is only one way of expressing
this: ‘p’, ‘q’, ‘r’, etc. have to be variables that give
expression in a general way to certain formal relations.

5.25

The occurrence of an operation does not characterize
the sense of a proposition.
Indeed, no statement is made by an operation, but
only by its result, and this depends on the bases of the
operation.
(Operations and functions must not be confused with
each other.)

5.251

A function cannot be its own argument, whereas an
operation can take one of its own results as its base.

5.252

It is only in this way that the step from one term
of a series of forms to another is possible (from one
type to another in the hierarchies of Russell and
Whitehead).
(Russell and Whitehead did not admit the possibility
of such steps, but repeatedly availed themselves of it.)

5.2521

If an operation is applied repeatedly to its own results, I
speak of successive applications of it. (‘O’O’O’a’ is the
result of three successive applications of the operation
‘O’ξ’ to ‘a’.)
In a similar sense I speak of successive applications of
more than one operation to a number of propositions.

5.2522

Accordingly I use the sign ‘[a, x, O’x]’ for the general
term of the series of forms a, O’a, O’O’a, . . . .This
bracketed expression is a variable: the ﬁrst term of
the bracketed expression is the beginning of the series
of forms, the second is the form of a term x arbitrarily
selected from the series, and the third is the form of the
term that immediately follows x in the series.
51

tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.2523

The concept of successive applications of an operation is
equivalent to the concept ‘and so on’.

5.253

One operation can counteract the eﬀect of another.
Operations can cancel one another.

5.254

An operation can vanish (e.g. negation in ‘∼∼p’:
∼∼p = p).

5.3

All propositions are results of truth-operations on
elementary propositions.
A truth-operation is the way in which a truthfunction is produced out of elementary propositions.
It is of the essence of truth-operations that, just as
elementary propositions yield a truth-function of themselves, so too in the same way truth-functions yield a
further truth-function. When a truth-operation is
applied to truth-functions of elementary propositions, it
always generates another truth-function of elementary
propositions, another proposition. When a truthoperation is applied to the results of truth-operations on
elementary propositions, there is always a single operation on elementary propositions that has the same
result.
Every proposition is the result of truth-operations on
elementary propositions.

5.31

The schemata in 4.31 have a meaning even when ‘p’, ‘q’,
‘r’, etc. are not elementary propositions.
And it is easy to see that the propositional sign in
4.442 expresses a single truth-function of elementary
propositions even when ‘p’ and ‘q’ are truth-functions of
elementary propositions.

5.32

All truth-functions are results of successive applications
to elementary propositions of a ﬁnite number of truthoperations.
52

tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.4

At this point it becomes manifest that there are no
‘logical objects’ or ‘logical constants’ (in Frege’s and
Russell’s sense).

5.41

The reason is that the results of truth-operations on
truth-functions are always identical whenever they are
one and the same truth-function of elementary
propositions.

5.42

It is self-evident that v, ⊃, etc. are not relations in the
sense in which right and left etc. are relations.
The interdeﬁnability of Frege’s and Russell’s ‘primitive signs’ of logic is enough to show that they are not
primitive signs, still less signs for relations.
And it is obvious that the ‘⊃’ deﬁned by means of ‘∼’
and ‘v’ is identical with the one that ﬁgures with ‘∼’ in
the deﬁnition of ‘v’; and that the second ‘v’ is identical
with the ﬁrst one; and so on.

5.43

Even at ﬁrst sight it seems scarcely credible that there
should follow from one fact p inﬁnitely many others,
namely ∼∼p, ∼∼∼∼p, etc. And it is no less remarkable that
the inﬁnite number of propositions of logic (mathematics) follow from half a dozen ‘primitive propositions’.
But in fact all the propositions of logic say the same
thing, to wit nothing.

5.44

Truth-functions are not material functions.
For example, an aﬃrmation can be produced by
double negation: in such a case does it follow that in
some sense negation is contained in aﬃrmation? Does
‘∼∼p’ negate ∼p, or does it aﬃrm p—or both?
The proposition ‘∼∼p’ is not about negation, as if negation were an object: on the other hand, the possibility
of negation is already written into aﬃrmation.
And if there were an object called ‘∼’, it would follow
that ‘∼∼p’ said something diﬀerent from what ‘p’ said,
53

tractatus logico-philosophicus

just because the one proposition would then be about ∼
and the other would not.
5.441

This vanishing of the apparent logical constants also
occurs in the case of ‘∼(∃x). ∼fx’, which says the same as
‘(x).fx’, and in the case of ‘(∃x).fx.x = a’, which says the
same as ‘fa’.

5.442

If we are given a proposition, then with it we are also
given the results of all truth-operations that have it as
their base.

5.45

If there are primitive logical signs, then any logic that
fails to show clearly how they are placed relatively to one
another and to justify their existence will be incorrect.
The construction of logic out of its primitive signs must
be made clear.

5.451

If logic has primitive ideas, they must be independent of
one another. If a primitive idea has been introduced, it
must have been introduced in all the combinations in
which it ever occurs. It cannot, therefore, be introduced
ﬁrst for one combination and later re-introduced for
another. For example, once negation has been introduced, we must understand it both in propositions of
the form ‘∼p’ and in propositions like ‘∼(p v q)’,
‘(∃x).∼fx’, etc. We must not introduce it ﬁrst for the one
class of cases and then for the other, since it would then
be left in doubt whether its meaning were the same in
both cases, and no reason would have been given for
combining the signs in the same way in both cases.
(In short, Frege’s remarks about introducing signs by
means of deﬁnitions (in The Fundamental Laws of Arithmetic)
also apply, mutatis mutandis, to the introduction of
primitive signs.)

5.452

The introduction of any new device into the symbolism
54

tractatus logico-philosophicus

of logic is necessarily a momentous event. In logic a new
device should not be introduced in brackets or in a
footnote with what one might call a completely
innocent air.
(Thus in Russell and Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica
there occur deﬁnitions and primitive propositions
expressed in words. Why this sudden appearance of
words? It would require a justiﬁcation, but none is
given, or could be given, since the procedure is in fact
illicit.)
But if the introduction of a new device has proved
necessary at a certain point, we must immediately ask
ourselves, ‘At what points is the employment of this
device now unavoidable?’ and its place in logic must be
made clear.
5.453

All numbers in logic stand in need of justiﬁcation.
Or rather, it must become evident that there are no
numbers in logic.
There are no pre-eminent numbers.

5.454

In logic there is no co-ordinate status, and there can be
no classiﬁcation.
In logic there can be no distinction between the
general and the speciﬁc.

5.4541

The solutions of the problems of logic must be simple,
since they set the standard of simplicity.
Men have always had a presentiment that there must
be a realm in which the answers to questions are
symmetrically combined—a priori—to form a selfcontained system.
A realm subject to the law: Simplex sigillum veri.

5.46

If we introduced logical signs properly, then we should
also have introduced at the same time the sense of all
combinations of them; i.e. not only ‘p v q’ but ‘∼(p v ∼q)’
55

tractatus logico-philosophicus

as well, etc. etc. We should also have introduced at the
same time the eﬀect of all possible combinations of
brackets. And thus it would have been made clear that
the real general primitive signs are not ‘p v q’, ‘(∃x).fx’,
etc. but the most general form of their combinations.
5.461

Though it seems unimportant, it is in fact signiﬁcant that
the pseudo-relations of logic, such as v and ⊃, need
brackets—unlike real relations.
Indeed, the use of brackets with these apparently
primitive signs is itself an indication that they are not the
real primitive signs. And surely no one is going to
believe that brackets have an independent meaning.

5.4611

Signs for logical operations are punctuation-marks.

5.47

It is clear that whatever we can say in advance about the
form of all propositions, we must be able to say all at once.
An elementary proposition really contains all logical
operations in itself. For ‘fa’ says the same thing as
‘(∃x).fx.x = a’.
Wherever there is compositeness, argument and function are present, and where these are present, we already
have all the logical constants.
One could say that the sole logical constant was what
all propositions, by their very nature, had in common
with one another.
But that is the general propositional form.

5.471

The general propositional form is the essence of a
proposition.

5.4711

To give the essence of a proposition means to give the
essence of all description, and thus the essence of the
world.

5.472

The description of the most general propositional form
56

tractatus logico-philosophicus

is the description of the one and only general primitive
sign in logic.
5.473

Logic must look after itself.
If a sign is possible, then it is also capable of signifying.
Whatever is possible in logic is also permitted. (The reason why ‘Socrates is identical’ means nothing is that
there is no property called ‘identical’. The proposition is
nonsensical because we have failed to make an arbitrary
determination, and not because the symbol, in itself,
would be illegitimate.)
In a certain sense, we cannot make mistakes in logic.

5.4731

Self-evidence, which Russell talked about so much, can
become dispensable in logic, only because language
itself prevents every logical mistake.—What makes logic
a priori is the impossibility of illogical thought.

5.4732

We cannot give a sign the wrong sense.

5.47321

Occam’s maxim is, of course, not an arbitrary rule, nor
one that is justiﬁed by its success in practice: its point is
that unnecessary units in a sign-language mean nothing.
Signs that serve one purpose are logically equivalent,
and signs that serve none are logically meaningless.

5.4733

Frege says that any legitimately constructed proposition
must have a sense. And I say that any possible proposition is legitimately constructed, and, if it has no
sense, that can only be because we have failed to give a
meaning to some of its constituents.
(Even if we think that we have done so.)
Thus the reason why ‘Socrates is identical’ says nothing is that we have not given any adjectival meaning to the
word ‘identical’. For when it appears as a sign for
identity, it symbolizes in an entirely diﬀerent way—the
signifying relation is a diﬀerent one—therefore the
57

tractatus logico-philosophicus

symbols also are entirely diﬀerent in the two cases: the
two symbols have only the sign in common, and that is
an accident.
5.474

The number of fundamental operations that are necessary depends solely on our notation.

5.475

All that is required is that we should construct a system
of signs with a particular number of dimensions—with
a particular mathematical multiplicity.

5.476

It is clear that this is not a question of a number of primitive
ideas that have to be signiﬁed, but rather of the expression
of a rule.

5.5

Every truth-function is a result of successive applications
to elementary propositions of the operation
‘(-----T)(ξ, . . . .)’.
This operation negates all the propositions in the
right-hand pair of brackets, and I call it the negation of
those propositions.

5.501

When a bracketed expression has propositions as its
terms—and the order of the terms inside the brackets is
indiﬀerent—then I indicate it by a sign of the form
‘(ξ)’. ‘ξ’ is a variable whose values are terms of the
bracketed expression and the bar over the variable indicates that it is the representative of all its values in the
brackets.
(E.g. if ξ has the three values P, Q, R, then
-

(ξ) = (P, Q, R).)
What the values of the variable are is something that is
stipulated.
The stipulation is a description of the propositions
that have the variable as their representative.
58

tractatus logico-philosophicus

How the description of the terms of the bracketed
expression is produced is not essential.
We can distinguish three kinds of description: 1. direct
enumeration, in which case we can simply substitute for
the variable the constants that are its values; 2. giving a
function fx whose values for all values of x are the propositions to be described; 3. giving a formal law that
governs the construction of the propositions, in which
case the bracketed expression has as its members all the
terms of a series of forms.
-

5.502

So instead of ‘(-----T)(ξ, . . . .)’, I write ‘N(ξ)’.
N(ξ) is the negation of all the values of the propositional variable ξ.

5.503

It is obvious that we can easily express how propositions
may be constructed with this operation, and how they
may not be constructed with it; so it must be possible to
ﬁnd an exact expression for this.

5.51

If ξ has only one value, then N(ξ) = ∼p (not p); if it has
two values, then N(ξ) = ∼p.∼q (neither p nor q).

5.511

How can logic—all-embracing logic, which mirrors the
world—use such peculiar crotchets and contrivances?
Only because they are all connected with one another in
an inﬁnitely ﬁne network, the great mirror.

5.512

‘∼p’ is true if ‘p’ is false. Therefore, in the proposition
‘∼p’, when it is true, ‘p’ is a false proposition. How then
can the stroke ‘∼’ make it agree with reality?
But in ‘∼p’ it is not ‘∼’ that negates; it is rather what is
common to all the signs of this notation that negate p.
That is to say the common rule that governs the construction of ‘∼p’, ‘∼∼∼p’, ‘∼p v ∼p’, ‘∼p.∼p’, etc. etc. (ad
inf.). And this common factor mirrors negation.

5.513

We might say that what is common to all symbols that

-

-

59

tractatus logico-philosophicus

aﬃrm both p and q is the proposition ‘p.q’; and that what
is common to all symbols that aﬃrm either p or q is the
proposition ‘p v q’.
And similarly we can say that two propositions are
opposed to one another if they have nothing in common
with one another, and that every proposition has only
one negative, since there is only one proposition that lies
completely outside it.
Thus in Russell’s notation too it is manifest that ‘q:p v
∼p’ says the same thing as ‘q’, that ‘p v ∼p’ says nothing.
5.514

Once a notation has been established, there will be in it a
rule governing the construction of all propositions that
negate p, a rule governing the construction of all propositions that aﬃrm p, and a rule governing the construction of all propositions that aﬃrm p or q; and so on.
These rules are equivalent to the symbols; and in them
their sense is mirrored.

5.515

It must be manifest in our symbols that it can only be
propositions that are combined with one another by ‘v’,
‘.’, etc.
And this is indeed the case, since the symbol in ‘p’ and
‘q’ itself presupposes ‘v’, ‘∼’, etc. If the sign ‘p’ in ‘p v q’
does not stand for a complex sign, then it cannot have
sense by itself: but in that case the signs ‘p v p’, ‘p.p’, etc.,
which have the same sense as p, must also lack sense. But
if ‘p v p’ has no sense, then ‘p v q’ cannot have a sense
either.

5.5151

Must the sign of a negative proposition be constructed
with that of the positive proposition? Why should it not
be possible to express a negative proposition by means
of a negative fact? (E.g. suppose that ‘a’ does not stand in
a certain relation to ‘b’; then this might be used to say
that aRb was not the case.)
60

tractatus logico-philosophicus

But really even in this case the negative proposition is
constructed by an indirect use of the positive.
The positive proposition necessarily presupposes the
existence of the negative proposition and vice versa.
5.52

If ξ has as its values all the values of a function fx for all
values of x, then N(ξ) = ∼(∃x).fx.

5.521

I dissociate the concept all from truth-functions.
Frege and Russell introduced generality in association
with logical product or logical sum. This made it difﬁcult to understand the propositions ‘(∃x).fx’ and
‘(x).fx’, in which both ideas are embedded.

5.522

What is peculiar to the generality-sign is ﬁrst, that it
indicates a logical prototype, and secondly, that it gives
prominence to constants.

5.523

The generality-sign occurs as an argument.

5.524

If objects are given, then at the same time we are given
all objects.
If elementary propositions are given, then at the same
time all elementary propositions are given.

5.525

It is incorrect to render the proposition ‘(∃x).fx’ in the
words, ‘fx is possible’, as Russell does.
The certainty, possibility, or impossibility of a situation is not expressed by a proposition, but by an
expression’s being a tautology, a proposition with sense,
or a contradiction.
The precedent to which we are constantly inclined to
appeal must reside in the symbol itself.

5.526

We can describe the world completely by means of fully
generalized propositions, i.e. without ﬁrst correlating
any name with a particular object.
Then, in order to arrive at the customary mode of
61

tractatus logico-philosophicus

expression, we simply need to add, after an expression
like, ‘There is one and only one x such that . . .’, the
words, ‘and that x is a’.
5.5261

A fully generalized proposition, like every other proposition, is composite. (This is shown by the fact that in
‘(∃x, φ).φx’ we have to mention ‘φ’ and ‘x’ separately. They
both, independently, stand in signifying relations to the
world, just as is the case in ungeneralized propositions.)
It is a mark of a composite symbol that it has
something in common with other symbols.

5.5262

The truth or falsity of every proposition does make some
alteration in the general construction of the world. And
the range that the totality of elementary propositions
leaves open for its construction is exactly the same as
that which is delimited by entirely general propositions.
(If an elementary proposition is true, that means, at
any rate, one more true elementary proposition.)

5.53

Identity of object I express by identity of sign, and not
by using a sign for identity. Diﬀerence of objects I
express by diﬀerence of signs.

5.5301

It is self-evident that identity is not a relation between
objects. This becomes very clear if one considers, for
example, the proposition ‘(x):fx.⊃.x = a’. What this
proposition says is simply that only a satisﬁes the function
f, and not that only things that have a certain relation to a
satisfy the function f.
Of course, it might then be said that only a did have
this relation to a; but in order to express that, we should
need the identity-sign itself.

5.5302

Russell’s deﬁnition of ‘=’ is inadequate, because according to it we cannot say that two objects have all their
properties in common. (Even if this proposition is never
correct, it still has sense.)
62

tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.5303

Roughly speaking, to say of two things that they are
identical is nonsense, and to say of one thing that it is
identical with itself is to say nothing at all.

5.531

Thus I do not write ‘f(a,b).a = b’, but ‘f(a,a)’ (or ‘f(b,b)’);
and not f(a,b).∼a = b’, but ‘f(a,b)’.

5.532

And analogously I do not write ‘(∃x,y).f(x,y).x = y’, but
‘(∃x).f(x,x)’; and not ‘(∃x,y).f(x,y).∼x = y’, but
‘(∃x.y).f(x,y)’.
(So Russell’s ‘(∃x,y).fxy’ becomes
‘(∃x.y).f(x,y).v.(∃x).f(x,x)’.)

5.5321

Thus, for example, instead of ‘(x):fx ⊃ x = a’ we write
‘(∃x).fx.⊃.fa: ∼(∃x,y).fx.fy’.
And the proposition, ‘Only one x satisﬁes f( )’, will read
‘(∃x).fx: ∼(∃x,y).fx.fy’.

5.533

The identity-sign, therefore, is not an essential constituent of conceptual notation.

5.534

And now we see that in a correct conceptual notation
pseudo-propositions like ‘a = a’, ‘a = b.b = c.⊃ a = c’,
‘(x).x = x’, ‘(∃x).x = a’, etc. cannot even be written
down.

5.535

This also disposes of all the problems that were connected with such pseudo-propositions.
All the problems that Russell’s ‘axiom of inﬁnity’
brings with it can be solved at this point.
What the axiom of inﬁnity is intended to say would
express itself in language through the existence of
inﬁnitely many names with diﬀerent meanings.

5.5351

There are certain cases in which one is tempted to use
expressions of the form ‘a = a’ or ‘p ⊃ p’ and the like. In
fact, this happens when one wants to talk about prototypes, e.g. about proposition, thing, etc. Thus in Russell’s
63

tractatus logico-philosophicus

Principles of Mathematics ‘p is a proposition’—which is
nonsense—was given the symbolic rendering ‘p ⊃ p’
and placed as an hypothesis in front of certain propositions in order to exclude from their argument-places
everything but propositions.
(It is nonsense to place the hypothesis ‘p ⊃ p’ in front
of a proposition, in order to ensure that its arguments
shall have the right form, if only because with a nonproposition as argument the hypothesis becomes not
false but nonsensical, and because arguments of the
wrong kind make the proposition itself nonsensical, so
that it preserves itself from wrong arguments just as
well, or as badly, as the hypothesis without sense that
was appended for that purpose.)
5.5352

In the same way people have wanted to express, ‘There
are no things’, by writing ‘∼(∃x).x = x’. But even if this
were a proposition, would it not be equally true if in fact
‘there were things’ but they were not identical with
themselves?

5.54

In the general propositional form propositions occur in
other propositions only as bases of truth-operations.

5.541

At ﬁrst sight it looks as if it were also possible for one
proposition to occur in another in a diﬀerent way.
Particularly with certain forms of proposition in
psychology, such as ‘A believes that p is the case’ and ‘A
has the thought p’, etc.
For if these are considered superﬁcially, it looks as if
the proposition p stood in some kind of relation to an
object A.
(And in modern theory of knowledge (Russell,
Moore, etc.) these propositions have actually been
construed in this way.)

5.542

It is clear, however, that ‘A believes that p’, ‘A has the
64

tractatus logico-philosophicus

thought p’, and ‘A says p’ are of the form ‘ “p” says p’: and
this does not involve a correlation of a fact with an
object, but rather the correlation of facts by means of the
correlation of their objects.
5.5421

This shows too that there is no such thing as the soul—
the subject, etc.—as it is conceived in the superﬁcial
psychology of the present day.
Indeed a composite soul would no longer be a soul.

5.5422

The correct explanation of the form of the proposition,
‘A makes the judgement p’, must show that it is impossible for a judgement to be a piece of nonsense.
(Russell’s theory does not satisfy this requirement.)

5.5423

To perceive a complex means to perceive that its
constituents are related to one another in such and such
a way.
This no doubt also explains why there are two possible
ways of seeing the ﬁgure

as a cube; and all similar phenomena. For we really see
two diﬀerent facts.
(If I look in the ﬁrst place at the corners marked a and
only glance at the b’s, then the a’s appear to be in front,
and vice versa).
5.55

We now have to answer a priori the question about all
the possible forms of elementary propositions.
65

tractatus logico-philosophicus

Elementary propositions consist of names. Since,
however, we are unable to give the number of names
with diﬀerent meanings, we are also unable to give the
composition of elementary propositions.
5.551

Our fundamental principle is that whenever a question
can be decided by logic at all it must be possible to
decide it without more ado.
(And if we get into a position where we have to look
at the world for an answer to such a problem, that shows
that we are on a completely wrong track.)

5.552

The ‘experience’ that we need in order to understand
logic is not that something or other is the state of things,
but that something is: that, however, is not an experience.
Logic is prior to every experience—that something is so.
It is prior to the question ‘How?’, not prior to the
question ‘What?’

5.5521

And if this were not so, how could we apply logic? We
might put it in this way: if there would be a logic even if
there were no world, how then could there be a logic
given that there is a world?

5.553

Russell said that there were simple relations between
diﬀerent numbers of things (individuals). But between
what numbers? And how is this supposed to be
decided?—By experience?
(There is no pre-eminent number.)

5.554

It would be completely arbitrary to give any speciﬁc
form.

5.5541

It is supposed to be possible to answer a priori the question whether I can get into a position in which I need
the sign for a 27-termed relation in order to signify
something.

5.5542

But is it really legitimate even to ask such a question?
66

tractatus logico-philosophicus

Can we set up a form of sign without knowing whether
anything can correspond to it?
Does it make sense to ask what there must be in order
that something can be the case?
5.555

Clearly we have some concept of elementary
propositions quite apart from their particular logical
forms.
But when there is a system by which we can create
symbols, the system is what is important for logic and
not the individual symbols.
And anyway, is it really possible that in logic I should
have to deal with forms that I can invent? What I have to
deal with must be that which makes it possible for me to
invent them.

5.556

There cannot be a hierarchy of the forms of elementary
propositions. We can foresee only what we ourselves
construct.

5.5561

Empirical reality is limited by the totality of objects. The
limit also makes itself manifest in the totality of
elementary propositions.
Hierarchies are and must be independent of reality.

5.5562

If we know on purely logical grounds that there must be
elementary propositions, then everyone who understands propositions in their unanalysed form must know
it.

5.5563

In fact, all the propositions of our everyday language,
just as they stand, are in perfect logical order.—That
utterly simple thing, which we have to formulate here, is
not a likeness of the truth, but the truth itself in its
entirety.
(Our problems are not abstract, but perhaps the most
concrete that there are.)
67

tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.557

The application of logic decides what elementary propositions there are.
What belongs to its application, logic cannot
anticipate.
It is clear that logic must not clash with its
application.
But logic has to be in contact with its application.
Therefore logic and its application must not overlap.

5.5571

If I cannot say a priori what elementary propositions
there are, then the attempt to do so must lead to obvious
nonsense.

5.6

The limits of my language mean the limits of my world.

5.61

Logic pervades the world: the limits of the world are also
its limits.
So we cannot say in logic, ‘The world has this in it,
and this, but not that.’
For that would appear to presuppose that we were
excluding certain possibilities, and this cannot be the
case, since it would require that logic should go beyond
the limits of the world; for only in that way could it view
those limits from the other side as well.
We cannot think what we cannot think; so what we
cannot think we cannot say either.

5.62

This remark provides the key to the problem, how much
truth there is in solipsism.
For what the solipsist means is quite correct; only it
cannot be said, but makes itself manifest.
The world is my world: this is manifest in the fact that
the limits of language (of that language which alone I
understand) mean the limits of my world.

5.621

The world and life are one.

5.63

I am my world. (The microcosm.)
68

tractatus logico-philosophicus

5.631

There is no such thing as the subject that thinks or entertains ideas.
If I wrote a book called The World as I found it, I should
have to include a report on my body, and should have to
say which parts were subordinate to my will, and which
were not, etc., this being a method of isolating the subject, or rather of showing that in an important sense
there is no subject; for it alone could not be mentioned in
that book.—

5.632

The subject does not belong to the world: rather, it is a
limit of the world.

5.633

Where in the world is a metaphysical subject to be
found?
You will say that this is exactly like the case of the eye
and the visual ﬁeld. But really you do not see the eye.
And nothing in the visual ﬁeld allows you to infer that it
is seen by an eye.

5.6331

For the form of the visual ﬁeld is surely not like this

5.634

This is connected with the fact that no part of our
experience is at the same time a priori.
Whatever we see could be other than it is.
Whatever we can describe at all could be other than it
is.
There is no a priori order of things.

5.64

Here it can be seen that solipsism, when its implications
are followed out strictly, coincides with pure realism.
The self of solipsism shrinks to a point without
69

tractatus logico-philosophicus

extension, and there remains the reality co-ordinated
with it.
5.641

Thus there really is a sense in which philosophy can talk
about the self in a non-psychological way.
What brings the self into philosophy is the fact that
‘the world is my world’.
The philosophical self is not the human being, not the
human body, or the human soul, with which psychology deals, but rather the metaphysical subject, the
limit of the world—not a part of it.

6

The general form of a truth-function is [p̄, ξ, N(ξ)].
This is the general form of a proposition.

6.001

What this says is just that every proposition is a result of
successive applications to elementary propositions of the
operation N(ξ).

6.002

If we are given the general form according to which
propositions are constructed, then with it we are also
given the general form according to which one proposition can be generated out of another by means of an
operation.

6.01

Therefore the general form of an operation Ω’(η-) is

-

-

-

-

-

-

[ξ, N(ξ)]’ (η-) (= [η-, ξ, N(ξ)]).
This is the most general form of transition from one
proposition to another.
6.02

And this is how we arrive at numbers. I give the following deﬁnitions
x = Ω0’ x Def.,
Ω’Ων’x = Ων+1’x Def.
So, in accordance with these rules, which deal with
signs, we write the series
70

tractatus logico-philosophicus

x, Ω’x, Ω’Ω’x, Ω’Ω’Ω’x, . . . ,
in the following way
Ω0’x, Ω0+1’x, Ω0+1+1’x, Ω0+1+1+1’x,

....

Therefore, instead of ‘[x, ξ, Ω’ξ]’,
I write ‘[Ω0’x, Ων’x, Ων+1’x]’.
And I give the following deﬁnitions
0+1 = 1 Def.,
0+1+1 = 2 Def.,
0+1+1+1 = 3 Def.,
(and so on).
6.021

A number is the exponent of an operation.

6.022

The concept of number is simply what is common to all
numbers, the general form of a number.
The concept of number is the variable number.
And the concept of numerical equality is the general
form of all particular cases of numerical equality.

6.03

The general form of an integer is [0, ξ, ξ+1].

6.031

The theory of classes is completely superﬂuous in
mathematics.
This is connected with the fact that the generality
required in mathematics is not accidental generality.

6.1

The propositions of logic are tautologies.

6.11

Therefore the propositions of logic say nothing. (They
are the analytic propositions.)

6.111

All theories that make a proposition of logic appear to
have content are false. One might think, for example,
that the words ‘true’ and ‘false’ signiﬁed two properties
among other properties, and then it would seem to be a
remarkable fact that every proposition possessed one of
these properties. On this theory it seems to be anything
71

tractatus logico-philosophicus

but obvious, just as, for instance, the proposition, ‘All
roses are either yellow or red’, would not sound obvious
even if it were true. Indeed, the logical proposition
acquires all the characteristics of a proposition of natural
science and this is the sure sign that it has been
construed wrongly.
6.112

The correct explanation of the propositions of logic
must assign to them a unique status among all
propositions.

6.113

It is the peculiar mark of logical propositions that one
can recognize that they are true from the symbol alone,
and this fact contains in itself the whole philosophy of
logic. And so too it is a very important fact that the
truth or falsity of non-logical propositions cannot be
recognized from the propositions alone.

6.12

The fact that the propositions of logic are tautologies
shows the formal—logical—properties of language and
the world.
The fact that a tautology is yielded by this particular way
of connecting its constituents characterizes the logic of
its constituents.
If propositions are to yield a tautology when they are
connected in a certain way, they must have certain
structural properties. So their yielding a tautology
when combined in this way shows that they possess these
structural properties.

6.1201

For example, the fact that the propositions ‘p’ and ‘∼p’ in
the combination ‘∼(p.∼p)’ yield a tautology shows that
they contradict one another. The fact that the propositions ‘p ⊃ q’, ‘p’, and ‘q’, combined with one another in
the form ‘(p ⊃ q).(p):⊃:(q)’, yield a tautology shows
that q follows from p and p ⊃ q. The fact that ‘(x).fx:⊃ fa’
is a tautology shows that fa follows from (x).fx. Etc. etc.
72

tractatus logico-philosophicus

6.1202

It is clear that one could achieve the same purpose by
using contradictions instead of tautologies.

6.1203

In order to recognize an expression as a tautology, in
cases where no generality-sign occurs in it, one
can employ the following intuitive method: instead
of ‘p’, ‘q’, ‘r’, etc. I write ‘TpF’, ‘TqF’, ‘TrF’, etc. Truthcombinations I express by means of brackets, e.g.

and I use lines to express the correlation of the truth
or falsity of the whole proposition with the truthcombinations of its truth-arguments, in the following
way

So this sign, for instance, would represent the proposition p ⊃ q. Now, by way of example, I wish to examine the proposition ∼(p. ∼p) (the law of contradiction) in
order to determine whether it is a tautology. In our
notation the form ‘∼ξ’ is written as

73

tractatus logico-philosophicus

and the form ‘ξ. ’ as

Hence the proposition ∼(p.∼q) reads as follows

If we here substitute ‘p’ for ‘q’ and examine how the
outermost T and F are connected with the innermost
ones, the result will be that the truth of the whole proposition is correlated with all the truth-combinations of
its argument, and its falsity with none of the truthcombinations.
6.121

The propositions of logic demonstrate the logical properties of propositions by combining them so as to form
propositions that say nothing.
This method could also be called a zero-method. In a
logical proposition, propositions are brought into equilibrium with one another, and the state of equilibrium
then indicates what the logical constitution of these
propositions must be.

6.122

It follows from this that we can actually do without
74

tractatus logico-philosophicus

logical propositions; for in a suitable notation we can in
fact recognize the formal properties of propositions by
mere inspection of the propositions themselves.
6.1221

If, for example, two propositions ‘p’ and ‘q’ in the combination ‘p ⊃ q’ yield a tautology, then it is clear that q
follows from p.
For example, we see from the two propositions themselves that ‘q’ follows from ‘p ⊃ q.p’, but it is also possible to show it in this way: we combine them to form ‘p
⊃ q.p:⊃:q’, and then show that this is a tautology.

6.1222

This throws some light on the question why logical propositions cannot be conﬁrmed by experience any more
than they can be refuted by it. Not only must a proposition of logic be irrefutable by any possible experience,
but it must also be unconﬁrmable by any possible
experience.

6.1223

Now it becomes clear why people have often felt as if it
were for us to ‘postulate’ the ‘truths of logic’. The reason is
that we can postulate them in so far as we can postulate
an adequate notation.

6.1224

It also becomes clear now why logic was called the
theory of forms and of inference.

6.123

Clearly the laws of logic cannot in their turn be subject
to laws of logic.
(There is not, as Russell thought, a special law of contradiction for each ‘type’; one law is enough, since it is
not applied to itself.)

6.1231

The mark of a logical proposition is not general validity.
To be general means no more than to be accidentally
valid for all things. An ungeneralized proposition can be
tautological just as well as a generalized one.
75

tractatus logico-philosophicus

6.1232

The general validity of logic might be called essential,
in contrast with the accidental general validity of such
propositions as ‘All men are mortal’. Propositions like
Russell’s ‘axiom of reducibility’ are not logical propositions, and this explains our feeling that, even if they
were true, their truth could only be the result of a
fortunate accident.

6.1233

It is possible to imagine a world in which the axiom of
reducibility is not valid. It is clear, however, that logic has
nothing to do with the question whether our world
really is like that or not.

6.124

The propositions of logic describe the scaﬀolding of the
world, or rather they represent it. They have no ‘subjectmatter’. They presuppose that names have meaning and
elementary propositions sense; and that is their connexion with the world. It is clear that something about
the world must be indicated by the fact that certain
combinations of symbols—whose essence involves the
possession of a determinate character—are tautologies.
This contains the decisive point. We have said that some
things are arbitrary in the symbols that we use and that
some things are not. In logic it is only the latter that
express: but that means that logic is not a ﬁeld in which
we express what we wish with the help of signs, but
rather one in which the nature of the absolutely necessary signs speaks for itself. If we know the logical syntax
of any sign-language, then we have already been given
all the propositions of logic.

6.125

It is possible—indeed possible even according to the old
conception of logic—to give in advance a description of
all ‘true’ logical propositions.

6.1251

Hence there can never be surprises in logic.

6.126

One can calculate whether a proposition belongs to
76

tractatus logico-philosophicus

logic, by calculating the logical properties of the
symbol.
And this is what we do when we ‘prove’ a logical
proposition. For, without bothering about sense or
meaning, we construct the logical proposition out of
others using only rules that deal with signs.
The proof of logical propositions consists in the following process: we produce them out of other logical
propositions by successively applying certain operations
that always generate further tautologies out of the initial
ones. (And in fact only tautologies follow from a
tautology.)
Of course this way of showing that the propositions
of logic are tautologies is not at all essential to logic, if
only because the propositions from which the proof
starts must show without any proof that they are
tautologies.
6.1261

In logic process and result are equivalent. (Hence the
absence of surprise.)

6.1262

Proof in logic is merely a mechanical expedient to facilitate the recognition of tautologies in complicated cases.

6.1263

Indeed, it would be altogether too remarkable if a
proposition that had sense could be proved logically from
others, and so too could a logical proposition. It is clear
from the start that a logical proof of a proposition that
has sense and a proof in logic must be two entirely
diﬀerent things.

6.1264

A proposition that has sense states something, which is
shown by its proof to be so. In logic every proposition is
the form of a proof.
Every proposition of logic is a modus ponens represented in signs. (And one cannot express the modus
ponens by means of a proposition.)
77

tractatus logico-philosophicus

6.1265

It is always possible to construe logic in such a way that
every proposition is its own proof.

6.127

All the propositions of logic are of equal status: it is
not the case that some of them are essentially primitive
propositions and others essentially derived propositions.
Every tautology itself shows that it is a tautology.

6.1271

It is clear that the number of the ‘primitive propositions
of logic’ is arbitrary, since one could derive logic from a
single primitive proposition, e.g. by simply constructing
the logical product of Frege’s primitive propositions.
(Frege would perhaps say that we should then no longer
have an immediately self-evident primitive proposition.
But it is remarkable that a thinker as rigorous as Frege
appealed to the degree of self-evidence as the criterion
of a logical proposition.)

6.13

Logic is not a body of doctrine, but a mirror-image of
the world.
Logic is transcendental.

6.2

Mathematics is a logical method.
The propositions of mathematics are equations, and
therefore pseudo-propositions.

6.21

A proposition of mathematics does not express a
thought.

6.211

Indeed in real life a mathematical proposition is never
what we want. Rather, we make use of mathematical
propositions only in inferences from propositions that do
not belong to mathematics to others that likewise do not
belong to mathematics.
(In philosophy the question, ‘What do we actually use
this word or this proposition for?’ repeatedly leads to
valuable insights.)
78

tractatus logico-philosophicus

6.22

The logic of the world, which is shown in tautologies by
the propositions of logic, is shown in equations by
mathematics.

6.23

If two expressions are combined by means of the sign of
equality, that means that they can be substituted for one
another. But it must be manifest in the two expressions
themselves whether this is the case or not.
When two expressions can be substituted for one
another, that characterizes their logical form.

6.231

It is a property of aﬃrmation that it can be construed as
double negation.
It is a property of ‘1+1+1+1’ that it can be construed
as ‘(1+1)+(1+1)’.

6.232

Frege says that the two expressions have the same
meaning but diﬀerent senses.
But the essential point about an equation is that it is
not necessary in order to show that the two expressions
connected by the sign of equality have the same meaning, since this can be seen from the two expressions
themselves.

6.2321

And the possibility of proving the propositions of mathematics means simply that their correctness can be perceived without its being necessary that what they
express should itself be compared with the facts in order
to determine its correctness.

6.2322

It is impossible to assert the identity of meaning of two
expressions. For in order to be able to assert anything
about their meaning, I must know their meaning, and I
cannot know their meaning without knowing whether
what they mean is the same or diﬀerent.

6.2323

An equation merely marks the point of view from
79

tractatus logico-philosophicus

which I consider the two expressions: it marks their
equivalence in meaning.
6.233

The question whether intuition is needed for the solution of mathematical problems must be given the answer
that in this case language itself provides the necessary
intuition.

6.2331

The process of calculating serves to bring about that
intuition.
Calculation is not an experiment.

6.234

Mathematics is a method of logic.

6.2341

It is the essential characteristic of mathematical method
that it employs equations. For it is because of this
method that every proposition of mathematics must go
without saying.

6.24

The method by which mathematics arrives at its equations is the method of substitution.
For equations express the substitutability of two
expressions and, starting from a number of equations,
we advance to new equations by substituting diﬀerent
expressions in accordance with the equations.

6.241

Thus the proof of the proposition 2 × 2 = 4 runs as
follows:
(Ων)µ’x = Ων×µ’x Def.,
Ω2×2’x = (Ω2)2’x = (Ω2)1+1’x
= Ω2’Ω2’x = Ω1+1’Ω1+1’x= (Ω’Ω)’ (Ω’Ω)’x
= Ω’Ω’Ω’Ω’x = Ω1+1+1+1’x = Ω4’x.

6.3

The exploration of logic means the exploration of everything that is subject to law. And outside logic everything is
accidental.

6.31

The so-called law of induction cannot possibly be a law
80

tractatus logico-philosophicus

of logic, since it is obviously a proposition with sense.—
Nor, therefore, can it be an a priori law.
6.32

The law of causality is not a law but the form of a law.

6.321

‘Law of causality’—that is a general name. And just as
in mechanics, for example, there are ‘minimumprinciples’, such as the law of least action, so too in
physics there are causal laws, laws of the causal form.

6.3211

Indeed people even surmised that there must be a ‘law of
least action’ before they knew exactly how it went.
(Here, as always, what is certain a priori proves to be
something purely logical.)

6.33

We do not have an a priori belief in a law of conservation,
but rather a priori knowledge of the possibility of a logical
form.

6.34

All such propositions, including the principle of sufﬁcient reason, the laws of continuity in nature and of
least eﬀort in nature, etc. etc.—all these are a priori
insights about the forms in which the propositions of
science can be cast.

6.341

Newtonian mechanics, for example, imposes a uniﬁed
form on the description of the world. Let us imagine a
white surface with irregular black spots on it. We then
say that whatever kind of picture these make, I can
always approximate as closely as I wish to the description of it by covering the surface with a suﬃciently ﬁne
square mesh, and then saying of every square whether it
is black or white. In this way I shall have imposed a
uniﬁed form on the description of the surface. The form
is optional, since I could have achieved the same result
by using a net with a triangular or hexagonal mesh.
Possibly the use of a triangular mesh would have made
the description simpler: that is to say, it might be that we
81

tractatus logico-philosophicus

could describe the surface more accurately with a coarse
triangular mesh than with a ﬁne square mesh (or conversely), and so on. The diﬀerent nets correspond to
diﬀerent systems for describing the world. Mechanics
determines one form of description of the world by
saying that all propositions used in the description of the
world must be obtained in a given way from a given set
of propositions—the axioms of mechanics. It thus supplies the bricks for building the ediﬁce of science, and it
says, ‘Any building that you want to erect, whatever it
may be, must somehow be constructed with these
bricks, and with these alone.’
(Just as with the number-system we must be able to
write down any number we wish, so with the system
of mechanics we must be able to write down any
proposition of physics that we wish.)
6.342

And now we can see the relative position of logic and
mechanics. (The net might also consist of more than one
kind of mesh: e.g. we could use both triangles and hexagons.) The possibility of describing a picture like the
one mentioned above with a net of a given form tells us
nothing about the picture. (For that is true of all such
pictures.) But what does characterize the picture is that
it can be described completely by a particular net with a
particular size of mesh.
Similarly the possibility of describing the world
by means of Newtonian mechanics tells us nothing
about the world: but what does tell us something
about it is the precise way in which it is possible to
describe it by these means. We are also told something
about the world by the fact that it can be described
more simply with one system of mechanics than with
another.

6.343

Mechanics is an attempt to construct according to a
82

tractatus logico-philosophicus

single plan all the true propositions that we need for the
description of the world.
6.3431

The laws of physics, with all their logical apparatus, still
speak, however indirectly, about the objects of the
world.

6.3432

We ought not to forget that any description of the world
by means of mechanics will be of the completely general
kind. For example, it will never mention particular
point-masses: it will only talk about any point-masses
whatsoever.

6.35

Although the spots in our picture are geometrical ﬁgures, nevertheless geometry can obviously say nothing at
all about their actual form and position. The network,
however, is purely geometrical; all its properties can be
given a priori.
Laws like the principle of suﬃcient reason, etc. are
about the net and not about what the net describes.

6.36

If there were a law of causality, it might be put in the
following way: There are laws of nature.
But of course that cannot be said: it makes itself
manifest.

6.361

One might say, using Hertz’s terminology, that only
connexions that are subject to law are thinkable.

6.3611

We cannot compare a process with ‘the passage of
time’—there is no such thing—but only with another
process (such as the working of a chronometer).
Hence we can describe the lapse of time only by relying on some other process.
Something exactly analogous applies to space: e.g.
when people say that neither of two events (which
exclude one another) can occur, because there is nothing
to cause the one to occur rather than the other, it is really a
83

tractatus logico-philosophicus

matter of our being unable to describe one of the two
events unless there is some sort of asymmetry to be
found. And if such an asymmetry is to be found, we can
regard it as the cause of the occurrence of the one and the
non-occurrence of the other.
6.36111

Kant’s problem about the right hand and the left
hand, which cannot be made to coincide, exists even in
two dimensions. Indeed, it exists in one-dimensional
space
- - - 䊊——X - - X——䊊 - - - a
b
in which the two congruent ﬁgures, a and b, cannot be
made to coincide unless they are moved out of this
space. The right hand and the left hand are in fact completely congruent. It is quite irrelevant that they cannot
be made to coincide.
A right-hand glove could be put on the left hand, if it
could be turned round in four-dimensional space.

6.362

What can be described can happen too: and what the
law of causality is meant to exclude cannot even be
described.

6.363

The procedure of induction consists in accepting as true
the simplest law that can be reconciled with our
experiences.

6.3631

This procedure, however, has no logical justiﬁcation but
only a psychological one.
It is clear that there are no grounds for believing that
the simplest eventuality will in fact be realized.

6.36311

It is an hypothesis that the sun will rise tomorrow: and
this means that we do not know whether it will rise.

6.37

There is no compulsion making one thing happen
84

tractatus logico-philosophicus

because another has happened. The only necessity that
exists is logical necessity.
6.371

The whole modern conception of the world is founded
on the illusion that the so-called laws of nature are the
explanations of natural phenomena.

6.372

Thus people today stop at the laws of nature, treating
them as something inviolable, just as God and Fate were
treated in past ages.
And in fact both are right and both wrong: though
the view of the ancients is clearer in so far as they have a
clear and acknowledged terminus, while the modern
system tries to make it look as if everything were
explained.

6.373

The world is independent of my will.

6.374

Even if all that we wish for were to happen, still this
would only be a favour granted by fate, so to speak: for
there is no logical connexion between the will and the
world, which would guarantee it, and the supposed
physical connexion itself is surely not something that we
could will.

6.375

Just as the only necessity that exists is logical necessity,
so too the only impossibility that exists is logical
impossibility.

6.3751

For example, the simultaneous presence of two colours
at the same place in the visual ﬁeld is impossible, in fact
logically impossible, since it is ruled out by the logical
structure of colour.
Let us think how this contradiction appears in
physics: more or less as follows—a particle cannot have
two velocities at the same time; that is to say, it cannot
be in two places at the same time; that is to say, particles
that are in diﬀerent places at the same time cannot
be identical.
85

tractatus logico-philosophicus

(It is clear that the logical product of two elementary
propositions can neither be a tautology nor a contradiction. The statement that a point in the visual ﬁeld
has two diﬀerent colours at the same time is a
contradiction.)
6.4

All propositions are of equal value.

6.41

The sense of the world must lie outside the world. In the
world everything is as it is, and everything happens as it
does happen: in it no value exists—and if it did exist, it
would have no value.
If there is any value that does have value, it must lie
outside the whole sphere of what happens and is the
case. For all that happens and is the case is accidental.
What makes it non-accidental cannot lie within the
world, since if it did it would itself be accidental.
It must lie outside the world.

6.42

So too it is impossible for there to be propositions of
ethics.
Propositions can express nothing that is higher.

6.421

It is clear that ethics cannot be put into words.
Ethics is transcendental.
(Ethics and aesthetics are one and the same.)

6.422

When an ethical law of the form, ‘Thou shalt . . .’, is laid
down, one’s ﬁrst thought is, ‘And what if I do not do it?’
It is clear, however, that ethics has nothing to do with
punishment and reward in the usual sense of the terms.
So our question about the consequences of an action must
be unimportant.—At least those consequences should
not be events. For there must be something right about
the question we posed. There must indeed be some kind
of ethical reward and ethical punishment, but they must
reside in the action itself.
86

tractatus logico-philosophicus

(And it is also clear that the reward must be something pleasant and the punishment something
unpleasant.)
6.423

It is impossible to speak about the will in so far as it is
the subject of ethical attributes.
And the will as a phenomenon is of interest only to
psychology.

6.43

If the good or bad exercise of the will does alter the
world, it can alter only the limits of the world, not the
facts—not what can be expressed by means of language.
In short the eﬀect must be that it becomes an
altogether diﬀerent world. It must, so to speak, wax and
wane as a whole.
The world of the happy man is a diﬀerent one from
that of the unhappy man.

6.431

So too at death the world does not alter, but comes to an
end.

6.4311

Death is not an event in life: we do not live to experience
death.
If we take eternity to mean not inﬁnite temporal duration but timelessness, then eternal life belongs to those
who live in the present.
Our life has no end in just the way in which our visual
ﬁeld has no limits.

6.4312

Not only is there no guarantee of the temporal
immortality of the human soul, that is to say of its eternal survival after death; but, in any case, this assumption
completely fails to accomplish the purpose for which it
has always been intended. Or is some riddle solved by
my surviving for ever? Is not this eternal life itself as
much of a riddle as our present life? The solution of the
riddle of life in space and time lies outside space and time.
87

tractatus logico-philosophicus

(It is certainly not the solution of any problems of
natural science that is required.)
6.432

How things are in the world is a matter of complete
indiﬀerence for what is higher. God does not reveal himself in the world.

6.4321

The facts all contribute only to setting the problem, not
to its solution.

6.44

It is not how things are in the world that is mystical, but
that it exists.

6.45

To view the world sub specie aeterni is to view it as a
whole—a limited whole.
Feeling the world as a limited whole—it is this that is
mystical.

6.5

When the answer cannot be put into words, neither can
the question be put into words.
The riddle does not exist.
If a question can be framed at all, it is also possible to
answer it.

6.51

Scepticism is not irrefutable, but obviously nonsensical,
when it tries to raise doubts where no questions can be
asked.
For doubt can exist only where a question exists, a
question only where an answer exists, and an answer
only where something can be said.

6.52

We feel that even when all possible scientiﬁc questions
have been answered, the problems of life remain completely untouched. Of course there are then no questions
left, and this itself is the answer.

6.521

The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of the problem.
(Is not this the reason why those who have found
88

tractatus logico-philosophicus

after a long period of doubt that the sense of life became
clear to them have then been unable to say what constituted that sense?)
6.522

There are, indeed, things that cannot be put into words.
They make themselves manifest. They are what is mystical.

6.53

The correct method in philosophy would really be the
following: to say nothing except what can be said, i.e.
propositions of natural science—i.e. something that has
nothing to do with philosophy—and then, whenever
someone else wanted to say something metaphysical, to
demonstrate to him that he had failed to give a meaning
to certain signs in his propositions. Although it would
not be satisfying to the other person—he would not
have the feeling that we were teaching him
philosophy—this method would be the only strictly correct one.

6.54

My propositions serve as elucidations in the following
way: anyone who understands me eventually recognizes
them as nonsensical, when he has used them—as
steps—to climb up beyond them. (He must, so to speak,
throw away the ladder after he has climbed up it.)
He must transcend these propositions, and then he
will see the world aright.

7

What we cannot speak about we must pass over in
silence.

89

I NDEX

The translators’ aim has been to include all the more interesting words, and,
in each case, either to give all the occurrences of a word, or else to omit
only a few unimportant ones. Paragraphs in the preface are referred to as P1,
P2, etc.
In the translation it has sometimes been necessary to use different English
expressions for the same German expression or the same English expression
for different German expressions. The index contains various devices designed
to make it an informative guide to the German terminology and, in particular,
to draw attention to some important connexions between ideas that are more
difﬁcult to bring out in English than in German.
First, when a German expression is of any interest in itself, it is given in
brackets after the English expression that translates it, e.g. situation [Sachlage];
also, whenever an English expression is used to translate more than one
German expression, each of the German expressions is given separately in
numbered brackets, and is followed by the list of passages in which it is
translated by the English expression, e.g. reality 1. [Realität], 5.5561, etc.
2. [Wirklichkeit], 2.06, etc.
Secondly, the German expressions given in this way sometimes have two or
more English translations in the text; and when this is so, if the alternative
English translations are of interest, they follow the German expression inside
the brackets, e.g. proposition [Satz: law; principle].
The alternative translations recorded by these two devices are sometimes
given in an abbreviated way. For a German expression need not actually be

91

index
translated by the English expressions that it follows or precedes, as it is in the
examples above. The relationship may be more complicated. For instance,
the German expression may be only part of a phrase that is translated by the
English expression, e.g. stand in a relation to one another; are related [sich
verhalten: stand, how things; state of things].
Thirdly, cross-references have been used to draw attention to other important connexions between ideas, e.g. true, cf. correct; right: and a priori, cf.
advance, in.
In subordinate entries and cross-references the catchword is indicated by ~,
unless the catchword contains /, in which case the part preceding / is so
indicated, e.g. accident; ~al for accident; accidental, and state of/affairs;
~ things for state of affairs; state of things. Cross-references relate to the last
preceding entry or numbered bracket. When references are given both for a
word in its own right and for a phrase containing it, occurrences of the latter
are generally not also counted as occurrences of the former, so that both
entries should be consulted.
about [von etwas handeln:
concerned with; deal with;
subject-matter] 3.24, 5.44,
6.35; cf. mention; speak; talk
abstract 5.5563
accident; ~al [Zufall] 2.012, 2.0121,
3.34, 5.4733, 6.031, 6.1231,
6.1232, 6.3, 6.41
action 5.1362, 6.422
activity 4.112
addition cf. logical
adjectiv/e; ~al 3.323, 5.4733
advance, in [von vornherein] 5.47,
6.125; cf. a priori
aesthetics 6.421
afﬁrmation [Bejahung] 4.064,
5.124, 5.1241, 5.44, 5.513, 5.514,
6.231
afﬁx [Index] 4.0411, 5.02
agreement
1. [stimmen: right; true] 5.512
2. [Übereinstimmung] 2.21, 2.222,
4.2, 4.4, 4.42–4.431, 4.462
analysis [Analyse] 3.201, 3.25,
3.3442, 4.1274, 4.221, 5.5562;
cf. anatomize; dissect; resolve

analytic 6.11
anatomize [auseinanderlegen] 3.261;
cf. analysis. answer 4.003,
4.1274, 5.4541, 5.55, 5.551,
6.5–6.52
apparent 4.0031, 5.441, 5.461; cf.
pseudoapplication [Anwendung:
employment] 3.262, 3.5,
5.2521, 5.2523, 5.32, 5.5,
5.5521, 5.557, 6.001, 6.123,
6.126
a priori 2.225, 3.04, 3.05, 5.133,
5.4541, 5.4731, 5.55, 5.5541,
5.5571, 5.634, 6.31, 6.3211,
6.33, 6.34, 6.35; cf. advance,
in
arbitrary 3.315, 3.322, 3.342, 3.3442,
5.02, 5.473, 5.47321, 5.554,
6.124, 6.1271
argument 3.333, 4.431, 5.02, 5.251,
5.47, 5.523, 5.5351; cf. truthargument
~-place 2.0131, 4.0411, 5.5351
arithmetic 4.4611, 5.451
arrow 3.144, 4.461

92

index
articulate [artikuliert] 3.141, 3.251
~d [gegliedert] 4.032
ascribe [aussagen: speak; state;
statement; tell] 4.1241
assert
1. [behaupten] 4.122, 4.21,
6.2322
2. [zusprechen] 4.124
asymmetry 6.3611
axiom 6.341
~ of inﬁnity 5.535
~ of reducibility 6.1232, 6.1233

colour 2.0131, 2.0232, 2.0251, 2.171,
4.123, 6.3751
~-space 2.0131
combination
1. [Kombination] 4.27, 4.28, 5.46;
cf. rule, combinatory; truth-~
2. [Verbindung: connexion] 2.01,
2.0121, 4.0311, 4.221, 4.466,
4.4661, 5.131, 5.451, 5.515, 6.12,
6.1201, 6.121, 6.1221, 6.124,
6.23, 6.232; cf. sign
common 2.022, 2.16, 2.17, 2.18,
2.2, 3.31, 3.311, 3.317, 3.321,
3.322, 3.333, 3.341, 3.3411,
3.343–3.3441, 4.014, 4.12, 5.11,
5.143, 5.152, 5.24, 5.47, 5.4733,
5.512, 5.513, 5.5261, 6.022
comparison 2.223, 3.05, 4.05,
6.2321, 6.3611
complete
1. [vollkommen: fully] 5.156
2. [vollständig] 5.156;
analyse ~ly 3.201, 3.25;
describe ~ly 2.0201, 4.023,
4.26, 5.526, 6.342
complex 2.0201, 3.1432, 3.24,
3.3442, 4.1272, 4.2211, 4.441,
5.515, 5.5423
composite [zusammengesetzt]
2.021, 3.143, 3.1431, 3.3411,
4.032, 4.2211, 5.47, 5.5261,
5.5421, 5.55
compulsion 6.37
concatenation [Verkettung] 4.022;
cf. chain
concept [Begriff: primitive idea]
4.063, 4.126–4.1274, 4.431,
5.2523, 5.521, 5.555, 6.022; cf.
formal ~; pseudo-~
~ual notation [Begriffsschrift]
3.325, 4.1272, 4.1273, 4.431,
5.533, 5.534
~-word 4.1272

bad 6.43
basis 5.21, 5.22, 5.234, 5.24, 5.25,
5.251, 5.442, 5.54
beautiful 4.003
belief 5.1361, 5.1363, 5.541, 5.542,
6.33, 6.3631
bound; ~ary [Grenze: delimit; limit]
4.112, 4.463
brackets 4.441, 5.46, 5.461
build [Ban: construction] 6.341
calculation 6.126, 6.2331
cardinal cf. number
case, be the
1. [der Fall sein] 1, 1.12, 1.21, 2,
2.024, 3.342, 4.024, 5.1362,
5.5151, 5.541, 5.5542, 6.23
2. [So-Sein] 6.41
causality 5.136–5.1362, 6.32,
6.321, 6.36, 6.3611, 6.362;
cf. law
certainty [Gewißheit] 4.464, 5.152,
5.156, 5.525, 6.3211
chain 2.03; cf. concatenation
clariﬁcation 4.112
class [Klasse: set] 3.311, 3.315; 4.1272,
6.031
clear P2, 3.251, 4.112, 4.115, 4.116
make ~ [erklären: deﬁnition;
explanation] 5.452

93

index
concerned with [von etwas handeln:
about; deal with; subjectmatter] 4.011, 4.122
concrete 5.5563
condition 4.41, 4.461, 4.462; cf.
truth-~
conﬁguration 2.0231, 2.0271,
2.0272, 3.21
connexion
1. [Verbindung: combination]
6.124, 6.232
2. [Zusammenhang: nexus]
2.0122, 2.032, 2.15, 4.03, 5.1311,
5.1362, 6.361, 6.374
consequences 6.422
conservation cf. law
constant 3.312, 3.313, 4.126,
4.1271, 5.501, 5.522;
cf. logical ~
constituent [Bestandteil] 2.011,
2.0201, 3.24, 3.315, 3.4, 4.024,
4.025, 5.4733, 5.533, 5.5423,
6.12
construct [bilden] 4.51, 5.4733, 5.475,
5.501, 5.503, 5.512, 5.514, 5.5151,
6.126, 6.1271
construction
1. [Bau: build] 4.002, 4.014, 5.45,
5.5262, 6.002
2. [Konstruktion] 4.023, 4.5, 5.233,
5.556, 6.343
contain [enthalten] 2.014, 2.203,
3.02, 3.13, 3.24, 3.332, 3.333,
5.121, 5.122, 5.44, 5.47
content
1. [Gehalt] 6.111
2. [Inhalt] 2.025, 3.13, 3.31
continuity cf. law
contradiction
1. [Kontradiktion] 4.46–4.4661,
5.101, 5.143, 5.152, 5.525,
6.1202, 6.3751
2. [Widerspruch] 3.032, 4.1211,

4.211, 5.1241, 6.1201, 6.3751;
cf. law of ~
convention
1. [Abmachung] 4.002
2. [Übereinkunft] 3.315, 5.02
co-ordinate 3.032, 3.41, 3.42, 5.64
copula 3.323
correct [richtig] 2.17, 2.173, 2.18,
2.21, 3.04, 5.5302, 5.62, 6.2321;
cf. incorrect; true
correlate [zuordnen] 2.1514, 2.1515,
4.43, 4.44, 5.526, 5.542, 6.1203
correspond [entsprechen] 2.13, 3.2,
3.21, 3.315, 4.0621, 4.063, 4.28,
4.441, 4.466, 5.5542
creation 3.031, 5.123
critique of language 4.0031
cube 5.5423
Darwin 4.1122
deal with [von etwas handeln: about;
concerned with; subjectmatter] 2.0121
death 6.431–6.4312
deduce [ folgern] 5.132–5.134; cf.
infer
deﬁnition
1. [Deﬁnition] 3.24, 3.26–3.262,
3.343, 4.241, 5.42, 5.451, 5.452,
5.5302, 6.02
2. [Erklärung: clear, make;
explanation] 5.154
delimit [begrenzen: bound; limit]
5.5262
depiction [Abbildung: form, logicopictorial; form, pictorial;
pictorial] 2.16–2.172, 2.18, 2.19,
2.2, 2.201, 4.013, 4.014, 4.015,
4.016, 4.041
derive [ableiten] 4.0141, 4.243,
6.127, 6.1271; cf. infer
description [Beschreibung] 2.0201,
2.02331, 3.144, 3.24, 3.317, 3.33,

94

index
4.016, 4.023, 4.0641, 4.26, 4.5,
5.02, 5.156, 5.4711, 5.472, 5.501,
5.634, 6.124, 6.125, 6.342, 6.35,
6.3611, 6.362
~ of the world [Weltb.] 6.341,
6.343, 6.3432
designate [bezeichnen: sign; signify]
4.063
determin/ate [bestimmt] 2.031,
2.032, 2.14, 2.15, 3.14, 3.23,
3.251, 4.466, 6.124; cf.
indeterminateness;
undetermined
~e 1.11, 1.12, 2.0231, 2.05, 3.327,
3.4, 3.42, 4.063, 4.0641, 4.431,
4.463
difference [Verschiedenheit] 2.0233,
5.135, 5.53,6232, 6.3751
display [aufweisen] 2.172, 4.121; cf.
show
dissect [zergliedern] 3.26; cf.
analysis
doctrine [Lebre: theory] 4.112, 6.13
doubt 6.51, 6.521
dualism 4.128
duration 6.4311
dynamical model 4.04

employment
1. [Anwendung: application]
3.202, 3.323, 5.452
2. [Verwendung: use] 3.327
enumeration 5.501
equal value, of [gleichwertig] 6.4
equality/, numerical
[Zahlengleichheit] 6.022
sign of ~ [Gleichheitszeichen:
identity, sign for] 6.23, 6.232
equation [Gleichung] 4.241, 6.2,
6.22, 6.232, 6.2323, 6.2341,
6.24
equivalent cf. meaning, ~ n.
[äquivalent] 5.232, 5.2523,
5.47321, 5.514, 6.1261
essence [Wesen] 2.011, 3.143, 3.1431,
3.31, 3.317, 3.34–3.3421, 4.013,
4.016, 4.027, 4.03, 4.112,
4.1121, 4.465, 4.4661, 4.5, 5.3,
5.471, 5.4711, 5.501, 5.533,
6.1232, 6.124, 6.126, 6.127,
6.232, 6.2341
eternity 6.4311, 6.4312; cf. sub specie
aeterni
ethics 6.42–6.423
everyday language
[Umgangssprache] 3.323, 4.002,
5.5563
existence
1. [Bestehen: hold; obtain;
subsist] 2, 2.0121, 2.04–2.06,
2.062, 2.11, 2.201, 4.1, 4.122,
4.124, 4.125, 4.2, 4.21, 4.25,
4.27, 4.3, 5.131, 5.135
2. [Existenz] 3.032, 3.24, 3.323, 3.4,
3.411, 4.1274, 5.5151
experience [Erfahrung] 5.552, 5.553,
5.634, 6.1222, 6.363
explanation [Erklärung: cleat, make;
deﬁnition] 3.263, 4.02, 4.021,
4.026, 4.431, 5.5422, 6.371,
6.372

effort, least cf. law
element 2.13–2.14, 2.15, 2.151,
2.1514, 2.1515, 3.14, 3.2, 3.201,
3.24, 3.42
~ary proposition [Elementarsatz]
4.21–4.221, 4.23, 4.24,
4.23–4.26, 4.28–4.42, 4.431,
4.45, 4.46, 4.51, 4.52, 5, 5.01,
5.101, 5.134, 5.152, 5.234,
5.3–5.32, 5.41, 5.47, 5.5, 5.524,
5.5262, 5.55, 5.555–5.5571,
6.001, 6.124, 6.3751
elucidation [Erläuterung] 3.263,
4.112, 6.54
empirical 5.5561

95

index
exponent 6.021
expression [Ausdruck: say] P3, 3.1,
3.12, 3.13, 3.142, 3.1431, 3.2,
3.24, 3.251, 3.262, 3.31–3.314,
3.318, 3.323, 3.33, 3.34, 3.341,
3.3441, 4.002, 4.013, 4.03,
4.0411, 4.121, 4.124, 4.125,
4.126, 4.1272, 4.1273, 4.241,
4.4, 4.43, 4.431, 4.441, 4.442,
4.5, 5.131, 5.22, 5.24, 5.242,
5.31, 5.476, 5.503, 5.5151, 5.525,
5.53, 5.5301, 5.535, 5.5352,
6.124, 6.1264, 6.21, 6.23,
6.232–6.2323, 6.24
mode of ~ [Ausdrucksweise] 4.015,
5.21, 5.526
external 2.01231, 2.0233, 4.023,
4.122, 4.1251
fact [Tatsache] 1.1–1.2, 2, 2.0121,
2.034, 2.06, 2.1, 2.141, 2.16, 3,
3.14, 3.142, 3.143, 4.016,
4.0312, 4.061, 4.063, 4.122,
4.1221, 4.1272, 4.2211, 4.463,
5.156, 5.43, 5.5151, 5.542, 5.5423,
6.2321, 6.43, 6.4321; cf.
negative ~
fairy tale 4.014
false [ falsch: incorrect] 2.0212,
2.21, 2.22, 2.222–2.224, 3.24,
4.003, 4.023, 4.06–4.063,
4.25, 4.26, 4.28, 4.31, 4.41,
4.431, 4.46, 5.512, 5.5262,
5.5351, 6.111, 6.113, 6.1203;
cf. wrong
fate 6.372, 6.374
feature [Zug] 3.34, 4.1221, 4.126
feeling 4.122, 6.1232, 6.45
ﬁnite 5.32
follow 4.1211, 4.52, 5.11–5.132,
5.1363–5.142, 5.152, 5.43,
6.1201, 6.1221, 6.126
foresee 4.5, 5.556

form [Form] 2.0122, 2.0141,
2.022–2.0231, 2.025–2.026,
2.033, 2.18, 3.13, 3.31, 3.312,
3.333, 4.002, 4.0031, 4.012,
4.063, 4.1241, 4.1271, 4.241,
4.242, 4.5, 5.131, 5.156, 5.231,
5.24, 5.241, 5.2522, 5.451, 5.46,
5.47, 5.501, 5.5351, 5.542,
5.5422, 5.55, 5.554, 5.5542,
5.555, 5.556, 5.6331, 6, 6.002,
6.01, 6.022, 6.03, 6.1201,
6.1203, 6.1224, 6.1264, 6.32,
6.34–6.342, 6.35, 6.422; cf. ~al;
general ~; propositional~;
series of ~s
logical~ 2.0233, 2.18,2181, 2.2,
3.315, 3.327, 4.12, 4.121, 4.128,
5.555, 6.23, 6.33
logico-pictorial ~ [logische Form
der Abbildung] 2.2
pictorial ~ [Form der Abbildung:
depiction; pictorial] 2.15, 2.151,
2.17, 2.172, 2.181,
2.22
representational ~ [Form der
Darstellung: present;
represent] 2.173, 2.174
formal [ formal] 4.122, 5.501
~ concept 4.126–4.1273
~ property 4.122, 4.124, 4.126,
4.1271, 5.231, 6.12, 6.122
~ relation [Relation] 4.122, 5.242
formulate [angeben: give; say] 5.5563
free will 5.1362
Frege P6, 3.143, 3.318, 3.325, 4.063,
4.1272, 4.1273, 4.431, 4.442,
5.02, 5.132, 5.4, 5.42, 5.451,
5.4733, 5.521, 6.1271, 6.232
fully [vollkommen: complete]
~ generalized 5.526, 5.5261
function [Funktion] 3.318, 3.333,
4.126, 4.1272, 4.12721, 4.24,
5.02, 5.2341, 5.25, 5.251, 5.44,

96

index
5.47, 5.501, 5.52, 5.5301; cf.
truth-~
Fundamental Laws of Arithmetic
[Grundgesetze der Arithmetik]
5.451; cf. primitive proposition
future 5.1361, 5.1362

1. [Gedanke: thought], musical ~
4.014
2. [Vorstellung: present;
represent] 5.631
idealist 4.0412
identical [identisch] 3.323, 4.003,
4.0411, 5.473, 5.4733, 5.5303,
5.5352, 6.3751; cf. difference
identity [Gleichheit] 5.53
sign for ~ [Gleichheitszeichen:
equality, sign of] 3.323, 5.4733,
5.53, 5.5301, 5.533; cf. equation
illogical [unlogisch] 3.03, 3.031,
5.4731
imagine [sich etwas denken: think]
2.0121, 2.022, 4.01, 6.1233
immortality 6.4312
impossibility [Unmöglichkeit]
4.464, 5.525, 5.5422, 6.375,
6.3751
incorrect
1. [ falsch: false] 2.17, 2.173, 2.18
2. [unrichtig] 2.21 independence
[Selbständigkeit] 2.0122, 3.261
independent [unabhängig] 2.024,
2.061, 2.22, 4.061, 5.152, 5.154,
5.451, 5.5261, 5.5561, 6.373
indeterminateness
[Unbestimmtheit] 3.24
indicate
1. [anzeige en] 3.322, 6.121, 6.124
2. [auf etwas zeigen: manifest;
show] 2.02331, 4.063
individuals 5.553
induction 6.31, 6.363
infer [schließen] 2.062, 4.023, 5.1311,
5.132, 5.135, 5.1361, 5.152, 5.633,
6.1224, 6.211; cf. deduce;
derive
inﬁnite 2.0131, 4.2211, 4.463, 5.43,
5.535, 6.4311
inﬁnity cf. axiom

general [allgemein] 3.3441, 4.0141,
4.1273, 4.411, 5.1311, 5.156,
5.242, 5.2522, 5.454, 5.46,
5.472, 5.521, 5.5262, 6.031,
6.1231, 6.3432
~ form 3.312, 4.1273, 4.5, 4.53,
5.46, 5.47, 5.471, 5.472, 5.54, 6,
6.002, 6.01, 6.022, 6.03
~ity-sign, notation for ~ity 3.24,
4.0411, 5.522, 5.523, 6.1203
~ validity 6.1231, 6.1232
generalization [Verallgemeine-rung]
4.0411, 4.52, 5.156, 5.526,
5.5261, 6.1231; cf. fully
geometry 3.032, 3.0321, 3.411, 6.35
give [angeben: formulate; say] 3.317,
4.5, 5.4711, 5.55, 5.554, 6.35
given [gegeben] 2.0124, 3.42,
4.12721, 4.51, 5.442, 5.524,
6.002, 6.124
God 3.031, 5.123, 6.372, 6.432
good 4.003, 6.43
grammar cf. logical
happy 6.374
Hertz 4.04, 6.361
hierarchy 5.252, 5.556, 5.5561
hieroglyphic script 4.016
higher 6.42, 6.432
hold [bestehen: existence; obtain;
subsist] 4.014
how [wie] 6.432, 6.44; cf. stand,
~ things
~) (what 3.221, 5.552
hypothesis 4.1122, 5.5351, 6.36311
idea cf. primitive ~

97

index
inner 4.0141, 5.1311, 5.1362
internal 2.01231, 3.24, 4.014, 4.023,
4.122–4.1252, 5.131, 5.2, 5.21,
5.231, 5.232
intuition [Anschauung] 6.233,
6.2331
intuitive [ansehaulich] 6.1203
judgement [Urteil] 4.063, 5.5422
~-stroke [Urteilstrich] 4.442
Julius Caesar 5.02
Kant 6.36111
know
1. [kennen] 2.0123,201231, 3.263,
4.021, 4.243, 6.2322; cf. theory
of knowledge
2. [wissen] 3.05, 3.24, 4.024,
4.461, 5.1362, 5.156, 5.5562,
6.3211, 6.33, 6.36311
language [Sprache] P2, P4, 3.032,
3.343, 4.001–4.0031, 4.014,
4.0141, 4.025, 4.121, 4.125,
5.4731, 5.535, 5.6, 5.62, 6.12,
6.233, 6.43; cf. critique of ~;
everyday ~; sign-~
law
1. [Gesetz: minimum-principle;
primitive proposition] 3.031,
3.032, 3.0321, 4.0141, 5.501,
6.123, 6.3–6.3211, 6.3431, 6.35,
6.361, 6.363, 6.422;
~ of causality [Kausalitätsg.] 6.32,
6.321;
~ of conservation [Erhaltungsg.]
6.33;
~ of contradiction [G. des
Widerspruchs] 6.1203, 6.123;
~ of least action [G. derkleinsten
Wirkung] 6.321, 6.3211;
~ of nature [Naturg.] 5.154, 6.34,
6.36, 6.371, 6.372

2. [Satz: principle of sufﬁcient
reason; proposition] 6.34;
~ of continuity [S. von der
Kontinuität] 6.34;
~ of least effort [S. vom kleinsten
Aufwande] 6.34
life 5.621, 6.4311, 6.4312, 6.52,
6.521
limit [Grenze: bound; delimit] P3,
P4, 4.113, 4.114, 4.51, 5.143,
5.5561, 5.6–5.62, 5.632, 5.641,
6.4311, 6.45
logic; ~al 2.012, 2.0121, 3.031,
3.032, 3.315, 3.41, 3.42, 4.014,
4.015, 4.023, 4.0312, 4.032,
4.112, 4.1121, 4.1213, 4.126,
4.128, 4.466, 5.02, 5.1362,
5.152, 5.233, 5.42, 5.43,
5.45–5.47, 5.472–5.4731,
5.47321, 5.522, 5.551–5.5521,
5.555, 5.5562–5.557, 5.61,
6.1–6.12, 6.121, 6.122,
6.1222–6.2, 6.22, 6.234, 6.3,
6.31, 6.3211, 6.342, 6.3431,
6.3631, 6.37, 6.374–6.3751;
cf. form, ~al; illogical
~al addition 5.2341
~al constant 4.0312, 5.4, 5.441,
5.47
~al grammar 3.325
~al multiplication 5.2341
~al object 4.441, 5.4
~al picture 2.18–2.19, 3., 4.03
~al place 3.41–3.42, 4.0641
~al product 3.42, 4.465, 5.521,
6.1271, 6.3751
~al space 1.13, 2.11, 2.202, 3.4,
3.42, 4.463
~al sum 3.42, 5.521
~al syntax 3.325, 3.33, 3.334,
3.344, 6.124
~o-pictorial cf. form
~o-syntactical 3.327

98

index
manifest [sich zeigen: indicate;
show] 4.122, 5.24, 5.4, 5.513,
5.515, 5.5561, 5.62, 6.23, 6.36,
6.522
material 2.0231, 5.44
mathematics 4.04–4.0411, 5.154,
5.43, 5.475, 6.031, 6.2–6.22,
6.2321, 6.233, 6.234–6.24
Mauthner 4.0031
mean [meinen] 3.315, 4.062, 5.62
meaning [Bedeutung: signify]
3.203, 3.261, 3.263, 3.3, 3.314,
3.315, 3.317, 3.323, 3.328–3.331,
3.333, 4.002, 4.026, 4.126,
4.241–4.243, 4.466, 4.5, 5.02,
5.31, 5.451, 5.461, 5.47321,
5.4733, 5.535, 5.55, 5.6, 5.62,
6.124, 6.126, 6.232, 6.2322,
6.53
equivalent in ~
[Bedeutungsgleichheit] 4.243,
6.2323
~ful [bedeutungsvoll] 5.233
~less [bedeutungslos] 3.328,
4.442, 4.4661, 5.47321
mechanics 4.04, 6.321,
6.341–6.343, 6.3432
mention [von etwas reden: talk
about] 3.24, 3.33, 4.1211, 5.631,
6.3432; cf. about
metaphysical 5.633, 5.641, 6.53
method 3.11, 4.1121, 6.121, 6.2,
6.234–6.24, 6.53; cf.
projection, ~ of; zero-~
microcosm 5.63
minimum-principle [MinimumGesetz: law] 6.321
mirror 4.121, 5.511, 5.512, 5.514, 6.13
~-image [Spiegelbild: picture] 6.13
misunderstanding P2
mode cf. expression; signiﬁcation
model 2.12, 4.01, 4.463; cf.
dynamical ~

modus ponens 6.1264
monism 4.128
Moore 5.541
multiplicity 4.04–4.0412, 5.475
music 3.141, 4.011, 4.014, 4.0141
mystical 6.44, 6.45, 6.522
name
1. [Name] 3.142, 3.143, 3.144,
3.202, 3.203, 3.22, 3.26, 3.261,
3.3, 3.314, 3.3411, 4.0311, 4.126,
4.1272, 4.22, 4.221, 4.23, 4.24,
4.243, 4.5, 5.02, 5.526, 5.535,
5.55, 6.124; cf. variable ~
general ~ [Gattungsn.] 6.321
proper ~ of a person [Personenn.]
3.323
2. [benennen; neunen] 3.144, 3.221
natur/e 2.0123, 3.315, 5.47, 6.124; cf.
law of ~e
~al phenomena 6.371
~al science 4.11, 4.111,
4.1121–4.113, 6.111, 6.4312, 6.53
necessary 4.041, 5.452, 5.474, 6.124;
cf. unnecessary
negation
1. [Negation] 5.5, 5.502
2. [Verneinung] 3.42, 4.0621,
4.064, 4.0641, 5.1241, 5.2341,
5.254, 5.44, 5.451, 5.5, 5.512,
5.514, 6.231
negative [negativ] 4.463, 5.513, 5.5151
~ fact 2.06, 4.063, 5.5151
network 5.511, 6.341, 6.342, 6.35
Newton 6.341, 6.342
nexus
1. [Nexus] 5.136, 5.1361
2. [Zusammenhang: connexion]
3.3, 4.22, 4.23
non-proposition 5.5351
nonsense [Unsinn] P4, 3.24, 4.003,
4.124, 4.1272, 4.1274, 4.4611,
5.473, 5.5303, 5.5351, 5.5422,

99

index
5.5571, 6.51, 6.45; cf. sense,
have no
notation 3.342, 3.3441, 5.474,
5.512–5.514, 6.1203, 6.122,
6.1223; cf. conceptual ~,
generality, ~ for
number
1. [Anzahl] 4.1272, 5.474–5.476,
5.55, 5.553, 6.1271
2. [Zahl: integer] 4.1252, 4.126,
4.1272, 4.12721, 4.128, 5.453,
5.553, 6.02, 6.022; cf. equality,
numerical; privileged ~s;
series of ~s; variable ~
cardinal ~ 5.02
~-system 6.341
object [Gegenstand] 2.01, 2.0121,
2.0123–2.0124, 2.0131–2.02,
2.021, 2.023–2.0233,
2.0251–2.032, 2.13, 2.15121,
3.1431, 3.2, 3.203–3.221, 3.322,
3.3411, 4.023, 4.0312, 4.1211,
4.122, 4.123, 4.126, 4.127,
4.1272, 4.12721, 4.2211, 4.431,
4.441, 4.466, 5.02, 5.123, 5.1511,
5.4, 5.44, 5.524, 5.526,
5.53–5.5302, 5.541, 5.542,
5.5561, 6.3431; cf. thing
obtain [bestehen: exist; hold;
subsist] 4.1211
obvious [sich von selbst verstehen:
say; understand] 6.111; cf. selfevidence
Occam 3.328, 5.47321
occur [vorkommen] 2.012–2.0123,
2.0141, 3.24, 3.311, 4.0621,
4.1211, 4.23, 4.243, 5.25, 5.451,
5.54, 5.541, 6.1203; operation
4.1273, 5.21–5.254, 5.4611, 5.47,
5.5, 5.503, 6.001–6.01, 6.021,
6.126; cf. sign for a logical ~;
truth-~

oppos/ed; ~ite [entgegengesetzt]
4.0621, 4.461, 5.1241, 5.513
order 4.1252, 5.5563, 5.634
paradox, Russell’s 3.333
particle 6.3751
perceive 3.1, 3.11, 3.32, 5.5423
phenomenon 6.423; cf. natural ~
philosophy P2, P5, 3.324, 3.3421,
4.003, 4.0031, 4.111–4.115,
4.122, 4.128, 5.641, 6.113, 6.211,
6.53
physics 3.0321, 6.321, 6.341,
6.3751
pictorial
1. [abbilden: depict; form,
logico-~] 2.15, 2.151, 2.1513,
2.1514, 2.17, 2.172, 2.181, 2.22;
cf. form, ~
2. [bildhaftig] 4.013, 4.015
picture [Bild: mirror-image; tableau
vivant] 2.0212,
2.1–2.1512, 2.1513–3.01, 3.42,
4.01–4.012, 4.021, 4.03, 4.032,
4.06, 4.462, 4.463, 5.156,
6.341, 6.342, 6.35; cf. logical ~;
prototype
place [Ort] 3.411, 6.3751; cf.
logical ~
point-mass [materieller Punkt]
6.3432
positive 2.06, 4.063, 4.463, 5.5151
possible 2.012, 2.0121,
2.0123–2.0141, 2.033,215,2151,
2.201–2.203, 3.02, 3.04, 3.11,
3.13, 3.23, 3.3421, 3.3441, 3.411,
4.015, 4.0312, 4.124, 4.125, 4.2,
4.27–4.3, 4.42, 4.45, 4.46,
4.462, 4.464, 4.5, 5.252, 5.42,
5.44, 5.46, 5.473, 5.4733, 5.525,
5.55, 5.61, 6.1222, 6.33, 6.34,
6.52; cf. impossibility; truthpossibility

100

index
postulate [Forderung: requirement]
6.1223
predicate cf. subject
pre-eminent [ausgezeichnet],
~ numbers 4.128, 5.453, 5.553
present
1. [darstellen: represent] 3.312,
3.313, 4.115
2. [vorstellen: idea; represent]
2.11, 4.0311
presuppose [voraussetzen] 3.31, 3.33,
4.1241, 5.515, 5.5151, 5.61,
6.124
primitive idea [Grundbegriff]
4.12721, 5.451, 5.476
primitive proposition [Grundgesetz]
5.43, 5.452, 6.127, 6.1271; cf.
Fundamental Laws of
Arithmetic; law
primitive sign [Urzeichen] 3.26,
3.261, 3.263, 5.42, 5.45, 5.451,
5.46, 5.461, 5.472
Principia Mathematica 5.452
principle of sufﬁcient reason [Satz
vom Grunde: law; proposition]
6.34, 6.35
Principles of Mathematics 5.5351
probability 4.464, 5.15–5.156
problem
1. [Fragestellung: question] P2,
5.62
2. [Problem] P2, 4.003, 5.4541,
5.535, 5.551, 5.5563, 6.4312,
6.521
product cf. logical
project/ion; ~ive 3.11–3.13, 4.0141
method of ~ion 3.11
proof [Beweis] 6.126, 6.1262,
6.1263–6.1265, 6.2321, 6.241
proper cf. name
property [Eigenschaft] 2.01231,
2.0231, 2.0233, 2.02331, 4.023,
4.063, 4.122–4.1241, 5.473,

5.5302, 6.111, 6.12, 6.121, 6.126,
6.231, 6.35; cf. formal ~
proposition [Satz: law; principle]
2.0122, 2.0201, 2.0211, 2.0231,
3.1 (& passim thereafter); cf.
non-~; primitive ~; pseudo-~;
variable, ~al; variable ~
~al form 3.312, 4.0031, 4.012, 4.5,
4.53, 5.131, 5.1311, 5.156, 5.231,
5.24, 5.241, 5.451, 5.47, 5.471,
5.472, 5.54–5.542, 5.5422, 5.55,
5.554, 5.555, 5.556, 6, 6.002
~al sign 3.12, 3.14, 3.143, 3.1431,
3.2, 3.21, 3.332, 3.34, 3.41, 3.5,
4.02, 4.44, 4.442, 5.31
prototype [Urbild] 3.24, 3.315, 3.333,
5.522, 5.5351; cf. picture
pseudo- cf. apparent
~-concept 4.1272
~-proposition 4.1272, 5.534, 5.535,
6.2
~-relation 5.461
psychology 4.1121, 5.541, 5.5421,
5.641, 6.3631, 6.423
punishment 6.422
question [Frage: problem] 4.003,
4.1274, 5.4541, 5.35, 5.551,
5.5542, 6.5–6.52
range [Spielraum] 4.463, 5.5262; cf.
space
real [wirklich] 2.022, 4.0031, 5.461
realism 5.64
reality
1. [Realität] 5.5561, 5.64
2. [Wirklichkeit] 2.06, 2.063, 2.12,
2.1511, 2.1512, 2.1515, 2.17,
2.171, 2.18, 2.201, 2.21, 2.222,
2.223, 4.01, 4.011, 4.021, 4.023,
4.05, 4.06, 4.0621, 4.12, 4.121,
4.462, 4.463, 5.512
reducibility cf. axiom

101

index
relation
1. [Beziehung] 2.1513, 2.1514, 3.12,
3.1432, 3.24, 4.0412, 4.061,
4.0641, 4.462, 4.4661, 5.131,
5.1311, 5.2–5.22, 5.42, 5.461,
5.4733, 5.5151, 5.5261, 5.5301; cf.
pseudo2. [Relation] 4.122, 4.123, 4.125,
4.1251, 5.232, 5.42, 5.5301,
5.541, 5.553, 5.5541; cf. formal ~
3. stand in a ~ to one another; are
related [sich verhalten: stand,
how things; state of things]
2.03, 2.14, 2.15, 2.151, 3.14,
5.5423
represent
1. [darstellen: present] 2.0231,
2.173, 2.174, 2.201–2.203, 2.22,
2.221, 3.032, 3.0321, 4.011,
4.021, 4.031, 4.04, 4.1, 4.12,
4.121, 4.122, 4.124, 4.125,
4.126, 4.1271, 4.1272, 4.24,
4.31, 4.462, 5.21, 6.1203,
6.124, 6.1264; cf. form,
~ational
2. [vorstellen: idea; present] 2.15
representative, be the ~ of
[vertreten] 2.131, 3.22, 3.221,
4.0312, 5.501
requirement [Forderung: postulate]
3.23
resolve cf. analysis
1. [auﬂösen] 3.3442
2. [zerlegen] 2.0201
reward 6.422
riddle 6.4312, 6.5
right [stimmen: agreement; true]
3.24
rule [Regel] 3.334, 3.343, 3.344,
4.0141, 5.47321, 5.476, 5.512,
5.514
combinatory ~ [Kombinationsr.]
4.442

~ dealing with signs [Zeichenr.]
3.331, 4.241, 6.02, 6.126
Russell P6, 3.318, 3.325, 3.331,
3.333, 4.0031, 4.1272–4.1273,
4.241, 4.442, 5.02, 5.132, 5.252,
5.4, 5.42, 5.452, 5.4731, 5.513,
5.521, 5.525, 5.5302, 5.532, 5.535,
5.5351, 5.541, 5.5422, 5.553,
6.123, 6.1232
say
1. [angeben: give] 5.5571
2. [ausdrücken: expression] 5.5151
3. [aussprechen: words, put into],
~ clearly 3.262
4. [sagen], can be said P3, 3.031,
4.115, 4.1212, 5.61, 5.62, 6.36,
6.51, 6.53;
said) (shown 4.022, 4.1212,
5.535, 5.62, 6.36;
~ nothing 4.461, 5.142, 5.43,
5.4733, 5.513, 5.5303, 6.11, 6.121,
6.342, 6.35
5. [sich von selbst verstehen:
obvious; understand], ~ing, go
without 3.334, 6.2341
scaffolding 3.42, 4.023, 6.124
scepticism 6.51
schema 4.31, 4.43, 4.441, 4.442,
5.101, 5.151, 5.31
science 6.34, 6.341, 6.52; cf.
natural ~
scope 4.0411
self, the [das Ich] 5.64, 5.641
self-evidence [Einleuchten] 5.1363,
5.42, 5.4731, 5.5301, 6.1271; cf.
obvious
sense [Sinn; sinnvoll] P2, 2.0211,
2.221, 2.222, 3.11, 3.13, 3.142,
3.1431, 3.144, 3.23, 3.3, 3.31,
3.326, 3.34, 3.341, 3.4, 4.002,
4.011, 4.014, 4.02–4.022,
4.027–4.031, 4.032, 4.061,

102

index
4.0621–4.064, 4.1211, 4.122,
4.1221, 4.1241, 4.126, 4.2,
4.243, 4.431, 4.465, 4.52, 5.02,
5.122, 5.1241, 5.2341, 5.25,
5.2521, 5.4, 5.42, 5.44, 5.46,
5.4732, 5.4733, 5.514, 5.515,
5.5302, 5.5542, 5.631, 5.641,
6.124, 6.126, 6.232, 6.41,
6.422, 6.521
have the same ~ [gleichsinnig]
5.515
have no ~; lack ~; without ~
[sinnlos] 4.461, 5.132, 5.1362,
5.5351; cf. nonsense
~ of touch [Tastsinn] 2.0131
series [Reihe] 4.1252, 4.45, 5.1, 5.232,
6.02
~ of forms [Formeur.] 4.1252,
4.1273, 5.252, 5.2522, 5.501
~ of numbers [Zahlenr.] 4.1252
set [Klasse: class] 3.142
show [zeigen: indicate; manifest]
3.262, 4.022, 4.0621, 4.0641,
4.121–4.1212, 4.126, 4.461,
5.1311, 5.24, 5.42, 5.5261,
5.5421, 5.5422, 5.631, 6.12,
6.1201, 6.1221, 6.126, 6.127,
6.22, 6.232; cf. display; say
sign [Zeichen] 3.11, 3.12, 3.1432,
3.201–3.203, 3.21, 3.221, 3.23,
3.261–3.263, 3.315, 3.32–3.322,
3.325–3.334, 3.3442, 4.012,
4.026, 4.0312, 4.061, 4.0621,
4.126, 4.1271, 4.1272,
4.241–4.243, 4.431–4.441,
4.466, 4.4661, 5.02, 5.451,
5.46, 5.473, 5.4732–5.4733,
5.475, 5.501, 5.512, 5.515, 5.5151,
5.53, 5.5541, 5.5542, 6.02,
6.1203, 6.124, 6.126, 6.1264,
6.53; cf. primitive ~;
propositional ~, rule dealing
with ~s; simple ~

be a ~ for [bezeichnen: designate;
signify] 5.42
combination of ~s [Zeichen
verbindung] 4.466, 5.451
~ for a logical operation [logisches
Operationsz.] 5.4611
~-language [Zeichensprache]
3.325, 3.343, 4.011, 4.1121,
4.1213, 4.5, 6.124
signif/y
1. [bedeuten: meaning] 4.115
2. [bezeichnen: designate: sign]
3.24, 3.261, 3.317, 3.321, 3.322,
3.333, 3.334, 3.3411, 3.344,
4.012, 4.061, 4.126, 4.127,
4.1272, 4.243, 5.473, 5.4733,
5.476, 5.5261, 5.5541, 6.111;
mode of ~ication
[Bezeichnungsweise] 3.322,
3.323, 3.325, 3.3421, 4.0411,
5.1311
similarity 4.0141, 5.231
simple 2.02, 3.24, 4.21, 4.24, 4.51,
5.02, 5.4541, 5.553, 5.5563,
6.341, 6.342, 6.363, 6.3631;
~ sign 3.201, 3.202, 3.21, 3.23,
4.026
simplex sigillum veri 5.4541
situation [Sachlage] 2.0121, 2.014,
2.11, 2.202, 2.203, 3.02, 3.11,
3.144, 3.21, 4.021, 4.03, 4.031,
4.032, 4.04, 4.124, 4.125,
4.462, 4.466, 5.135, 5.156,
5.525
Socrates 5.473, 5.4733
solipsism 5.62, 5.64
solution P8, 5.4541, 5.535, 6.4312,
6.4321, 6.521
soul 5.5421, 5.641, 6.4312
space [Raum] 2.0121, 2.013, 2.0131,
2.0251, 2.11, 2.171, 2.182,
2.202, 3.032–3.0321, 3.1431,
4.0412, 4.463, 6.3611, 6.36111,

103

index
6.4312; cf. colour-~; logical ~;
range
speak/ about [von etwas sprechen]
3.221, 6.3431, 6.423, 7.; cf.
about
~ for itself [aussagen: ascribe;
state; statement; tell] 6.124
stand/, how things [sich verhalten:
relation; state of things] 4.022,
4.023, 4.062, 4.5
~ for [ für etwas stehen] 4.0311,
5.515
state [aussagen: ascribe; speak;
statement; tell] 3.317, 4.03,
4.242, 4.442, 6.1264
statement [Aussage] 2.0201,
6.3751
make a ~ [aussagen: ascribe;
speak; state; tell] 3.332, 5.25
state of/ affairs [Sachverhalt:
~ things] 2–2.013, 2.014,
2.0272–2.062, 2.11, 2.201,
3.001, 3.0321, 4.023, 4.0311,
4.1, 4.122, 4.2, 4.21, 4.2211,
4.25, 4.27, 4.3
~ things
1. [Sachverhalt: ~ affairs] 2.01
2. [sich verhalten: relation; stand,
how things] 5.552
stipulate [ festsetzen] 3.316, 3.317,
5.501
structure [Struktur] 2.032–2.034,
2.15, 4.1211, 4.122, 5.13, 5.2,
5.22, 6.12, 6.3751
subject
1. [Subjekt] 5.5421, 5.631–5.633,
5.641
~-predicate propositions
4.1274
2. [Träger] 6.423
3. ~-matter [von etwas handeln:
about; concerned with; deal
with] 6.124

subsistent [bestehen: existence;
hold; obtain] 2.024, 2.027,
2.0271
sub specie aeterni 6.45; cf. eternity
substance [Substanz] 2.021, 2.0211,
2.0231, 2.04
substitut/e 3.344, 3.3441, 4.241,
6.23, 6.24
~ion, method of 6.24
successor [Nachfolger] 4.1252,
4.1273
sum, cf. logical
sum-total [gesamt: totality; whole]
2.063
superstition 5.1361
supposition [Annahme] 4.063
survival [Fortleben] 6.4312
symbol [Symhol] 3.24, 3.31, 3.317,
3.32, 3.321, 3.323, 3.325, 3.326,
3.341, 3.3411, 3.344, 4.126,
4.24, 4.31, 4.465, 4.4661,
4.5, 5.1311, 5.473, 5.4733,
5.513–5.515, 5.525, 5.5351, 5.555,
6.113, 6.124, 6.126
~ism [Symbolismus] 4.461, 5.451
syntax, cf. logical
system 5.475, 5.555, 6.341, 6.372; cf.
number-~
tableau vivant [lebendes Bild:
picture] 4.0311
talk about [von etwas reden:
mention] P2, 5.641, 6.3432;
cf. about
tautology 4.46–4.4661, 5.101,
5.1362, 5.142, 5.143, 5.152, 5.525,
6.1, 6.12–6.1203, 6.1221,
6.1231, 6.124, 6.126, 6.1262,
6.127, 6.22, 6.3751
tell [aussagen: ascribe; speak; state;
statement] 6.342
term [Glied] 4.1273, 4.442, 5.232,
5.252, 5.2522, 5.501

104

index
theory
1. [Lehre: doctrine] 6.1224;
~ of probability 4.464
2. [Theorie] 4.1122, 5.5422, 6.111;
~ of classes 6.031;
~ of knowledge 4.1121, 5.541;
~ of types 3.331, 3.332
thing cf. object; state of affairs;
state of ~s
1. [Ding] 1.1, 2.01–2.0122, 2.013,
2.02331, 2.151, 3.1431, 4.0311,
4.063, 4.1272, 4.243, 5.5301,
5.5303, 5.5351, 5.5352, 5.553,
5.634, 6.1231
2. [Sache] 2.01, 2.15, 2.1514,
4.1272
think [denken: imagine] P3, 3.02,
3.03, 3.11, 3.5, 4.114, 4.116,
5.4731, 5.541, 5.542, 5.61, 5.631
~able [denkbar] P3, 3.001, 3.02,
6.361; cf. unthinkable.
thought [Gedanke: idea] P3, 3,
3.01, 3.02, 3.04–3.1, 3.12, 3.2,
3.5, 4., 4.002, 4.112, 6.21
~-process [Denkprozeß]
4.1121
time 2.0121, 2.0251, 6.3611, 6.3751,
6.4311, 6.4312
totality [Gesamtheit: sum-total;
whole] 1.1, 1.12, 2.04, 2.05,
3.01, 4.001, 4.11, 4.52, 5.5262,
5.5561
transcendental 6.13, 6.421
translation 3.343, 4.0141, 4.025,
4.243
tru/e
1. [Faktum] 5.154
2. [wahr] 2.0211, 2.0212, 2.21,
2.22, 2.222–2.225, 3.01,
3.04, 3.05, 4.022–4.024,
4.06–4.063, 4.11, 4.25, 4.26,
4.28, 4.31, 4.41, 4.43, 4.431,
4.442, 4.46, 4.461, 4.464,

4.466, 5.11, 5.12, 5.123, 5.13,
5.131, 5.1363, 5.512, 5.5262,
5.5352, 5.5563, 5.62, 6.111, 6.113,
6.1203, 6.1223, 6.1232, 6.125,
6.343; cf. correct; right
come ~e [stimmen: agreement;
right] 5.123
~th-argument 5.01, 5.101, 5.152,
6.1203
~th-combination 6.1203
~th-condition 4.431, 4.442,
4.45–4.461, 4.463
~th-function 3.3441, 5, 5.1, 5.101,
5.234, 5.2341, 5.3, 5.31, 5.41,
5.44, 5.5, 5.521, 6
~th-ground 5.101–5.121, 5.15
~th-operation 5.234, 5.3, 5.32,
5.41, 5.442, 5.54
~th-possibility 4.3–4.44, 4.442,
4.45, 4.46, 5.101
~th-value 4.063
type 3.331, 3.332, 5.252, 6.123; cf.
prototype
unalterable [ fest] 2.023,
2.026–2.0271
understand [verstehen: obvious;
say] 3.263, 4.002, 4.003,
4.02, 4.021, 4.024, 4.026,
4.243, 4.411, 5.02, 5.451,
5.521, 5.552, 5.5562, 5.62;
cf. misunderstanding
make oneself understood
[sich verständigen] 4.026,
4.062
undetermined [nicht bestimmt] 3.24,
4.431
unit 5.155, 5.47321
unnecessary 5.47321
unthinkable 4.123
use
1. [Gebrauch] 3.326, 4.123, 4.1272,
4.241, 6.211;

105

index
~less [nicht gebraucht] 3.328
2. [Verwendung: employment]
3.325, 4.013, 6.1202
validity 6.1233; cf. general ~
value [Wert] 6.4, 6.41; cf. truth-~
~ of a variable 3.313,
3.315–3.317, 4.127, 4.1271,
5.501, 5.51, 5.52
variable 3.312–3.317, 4.0411, 4.1271,
4.1272, 4.1273, 4.53, 5.24,
5.242, 5.2522, 5.501, 6.022
propositional ~ [Satzvariable]
3.313, 3.317, 4.126, 4.127, 5.502
~ name 3.314, 4.1272
~ number 6.022
~ proposition [variabler Satz]
3.315
visual ﬁeld 2.0131, 5.633, 5.6331,
6.3751, 6.4311
Whitehead 5.252, 5.452
whole [gesamt: sum-total; totality]
4.11, 4.12

will [Wille; wollen] 5.1362, 5.631,
6.373, 6.374, 6.423, 6.43
wish [wünschen] 6.374
word [Wort] 2.0122, 3.14, 3.143,
3.323, 4.002, 4.026, 4.243,
6.211; cf. concept-~
put into ~s [aussprechen;
unaussprechlich: say] 3.221,
4.116, 6.421, 6.5, 6.522
world 1.–1.11, 1.13, 1.2, 2.021–2.022,
2.0231, 2.026, 2.063, 3.01, 3.12,
3.3421, 4.014, 4.023, 4.12,
4.2211, 4.26, 4.462, 5.123,
5.4711, 5.511, 5.526–5.5262,
5.551, 5.5521, 5.6–5.633, 5.641,
6.12, 6.1233, 6.124, 6.22, 6.342,
6.3431, 6.371, 6.373, 6.374,
6.41, 6.43, 6.431, 6.432, 6.44,
6.45, 6.54; cf. description of
the ~
wrong [nicht stimmen: agreement;
true] 3.24; cf. false
zero-method 6.121

106

