ON CERTAINTY

LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
Edited by G. E. M. ANSCOMBE
and Go Ho von WRIGHT
Translated by
DENIS PAUL and
G. E. M. ANSCOMBE

BASIL BLACKWELL
OXFORD

1969

0 B d Blackvell, Oxford 1969

Library of Congress Catalog
Card No. 69-20428

Printed in Great Britain by Alden and Mowbray Ltd
at the Alden Press, Oxford
and bound at Kemp Hall Bindery

PREFACE
What we publish here belongs to the last year and a half of
Wittgenstein's life. In the middle of 1949 he visited the United
States at the invitation of Norman Malcolm, staying at Malcolm's
house in Ithaca. Malcolm acted as a goad to his interest in Moore's
'defence of common sense', that is to say his claim to know a
number of propositions for sure, such as "Here is one hand, and
here is another", and "The earth existed for a long time before
my birth", and '9 have never been far from the earth's surface".
The first of these comes in Moore's 'Proof of the External
World'. The two others are in his 'Defence of Common Sense';
Wittgenstein had long been interested in these and had said to
Moore that this was his best article. Moore had agreed. This
book contains the whole of what Wittgenstein wrote on this topic
from that time until his death. It is all first-draft material, which
he did not live to excerpt and polish.
The material falls into four parts; we have shown the divisions
at 5 65, p. 10, 5 192, p. 27 and 5 299, p. 38. What we believe to
be the first part was written on twenty loose sheets of lined
foolscap, undated. These Wittgenstein left in his room in G. E. M.
Anscombe's house in Oxford, where he lived (apart from a visit
to Norway in the autumn) from April I 9jo to February I 9j I. I
(G. E. M. A.) am under the impression that he had written them
in Vienna, where he stayed from the previous Christmas until
March; b i t I cannot now recall the bas& of this impression. The
rest is-in small notebooks, containing dates; towards the end,
indeed, the date of writing is always given. The last entry is two
days before his death on April 29th 195r. We have left the dates
exactly as they appear in the manuscripts. The numbering of the
single sections, however, is by the Editors.
These were not the only things Wittgenstein wrote during this
period. He wrote i.a. a fair amount on colour-concepts, and this
material he did excerpt and polish, reducing it to a small compass.
We expect to publish a volume containing this and other material
written after the completion of Philosopbi~alInvestigations Part 11.
It seemed appropriate to publish this work by itself. It is not a
selection; Wittgenstein marked it off in his notebooks as a
separate topic, which he apparently took up at four separate
periods during this eighteen months. It constitutes a single
sustained treatment of the topic.
G. E. M. Anscombe
G. H. von Wright
vie

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Dr. Lotte Labowsky and Dr. Anselm Miiller are to be sincerely
thanked for advice about the translation of this work.

If you do know that here is one hand,' we'll grant you all the
rest.
When one says that such and such a proposition can't be
proved, of course that does not mean that it can't be derived from
other propositions; any proposition can be derived from other
ones. But they may be no more certain than it is itself. (On this a
curious remark by H. Newman.)
1.

From its seeming to me-or to everyone-to be so, it doesn't
follow that it is so.
What we can ask is whether it can make sense to doubt it.
2.

If e.g. someone says "I don't know if there's a hand here" he
might be told "Look closer".-This
possibility of satisfying
oneself is part of the language-game. Is one of its essential features.
3.

"1 know that I am a human being." In order to see how unclear the sense of this proposition is, consider its negation. At
most it might be taken to mean "I know I have the organs of
a human". (E.g.a brain which, after all, no one has ever yet
seen.) But what about such a proposition as "I know I have a
brain"? Can I doubt it? Grounds for doubt are lacking! Everything speaks in its favour, nothing against it. Nevertheless it is
imaginable that my skull should turn out empty when it was
operated on.
4.

.

Whether a proposition can turn out false after all depends on
what I make count as determinants for that proposition.
5

6. Now, can one enumerate what one knows (like Moore)?
Straight off like that, I believe not.-For otherwise the expression
''I
know" gets misused. And through this misuse a queer and
extremely important mental state seems to be revealed.
7. My life shews that I know or am certain that there is a chair
over there, or a door, and so on.-I tell a friend e.g. "Take that
chair over there", "Shut the door", etc. etc.

'

See G. E. Moore, "Proof of an Eaunal World'', Proceedings of fbu B r i m
AcademyJ Vol. XXV, 1939; also !'A Defence of Common Sense" in Confemporav
Brifisb PbiIosophy, 2nd SmiesJ Ed. J. H.Muirhead, 1925. Both papers are in Moore's
PbihpbicaI Papers, London, George Allen and Unwin, 1959. Edilors.

The ditference between the concept of 'knowing' and the
concept of 'being certain' isn't of any great importance at all,
except where "I know" is meant to mean: I can't be wrong. In
a law-court, for example, "I am certain" could replace "I know"
in every piece of testimony. We might even imagine its being
forbidden to say "I know" there. [A passage in WiZheZm Meister,
where "You know" or "You knew" is used in the sense "You
were certain", the facts being different from what he knew.]
8.

9 Now do I, in the course of my life, make sure I know that
here is a hand-my own hand, that is?

I know that a sick man is lying here ? Nonsense! I am sitting
at his bedside, I am looking attentively into his face.-So I don't
know, then, that there is a sick man lying here? Neither the
question nor the assertion makes sense. Any more than the
assertion "I am here", which I might yet use at any moment, if
suitable occasion presented itself.-Then
is 6' 2 x 2 = 4"
nonsense in the same way, and not a proposition of arithmetic,
apart from particular occasions ? ' ' 2 x 2 = 4" is a true proposition of arithmetic-not "on particular occasions" nor "always3'but the spoken or written sentence "2 x 2 = 4" in Chinese might
have a different meaning or be out and out nonsense, and from
this is seen that it is only in use that the proposition has its sense.
And "I know that there's a sick man lying here", used in an
unsziitable situation, seems not to be nonsense but rather seems
matter-of-course, only because one can fairly' easily imagine a
situation to fit it, and one thinks that the words "I know that. ..
are always in place where there is no doubt, and hence even where
the expression of doubt would be unintelligible.
I0.

9'

We just do not see how very specialized the use of "I
know" is.
11.

-For "I know" seems to describe a state of &airs which
guarantees what is known, guarantees it as a fact. One always
forgets the expression "I thought I knew".
12.

For it is not as though the proposition "It is so" could be
inferred from someone else's utterance: "I know it is so". Nor
from the utterance together with its not being a lie.-But can't
I infer "It is so" from my own utterance "I know etc."? Yes;
I 3.

and also "There is a hand there" follows from the proposition
"He knows that there's a hand there". But from his utterance "I
know
it does not follow that he does know it.

. . ."

14- That he does know takes some shewing.

It needs to be shewtz that no mistake was possible. Giving
the assurance "I know" doesn't suffice. For it is after all only an
assurance that I can't be making a mistake, and it needs to be
objectiueb established that I am not making a mistake about that.
I j.

16. "If I know something, then I also know that I know it, etc."
amounts to: "I know that" means "I am incapable of being wrong
about that". But whether I am so needs to be established obj ectively.
CC
17. Suppose now I say I m incapable of being wrong about
this: that is a book" while I point to an object. What would a
mistake here be like? And have I any clear idea of it?
9

"I know" often means: I have the proper grounds for my
statement. So if the other person is acquainted with the languagegame, he would admit that I know. The other, if he is acquainted
with the language-game, must be able to imagine how one may
know something of the kind.
18.

19. The statement "I know that here is a hand" may then be
continued: "for it's my hand that I'm looking at". Then a reasonwill the idealist;
able man will not doubt that I know.-Nor
rather he will say that he was not dealing with the practical doubt
which is being dismissed, but there is a further doubt behind
that one.-That this is an illz~siotzhas to be shewn in a different
way.
"Doubting the existence of the external world" does not
mean for example doubting the existence of a planet, which later
observations proved to exist.-Or does Moore want to say that
knowing that here is his hand is different in kind from knowing
the existence of the planet Saturn? Otherwise it would be possible
to point out the discovery of the planet Saturn to the doubters
and say that its existence has been proved, and hence the existence
of the external world as well.
20.

Moore's view really comes down to this: the concept 'know'
is analogous to the concepts 'believe', surmise', 'doubt', 'be
convinced' in that the statement "I know . ..." can't be a mistake.
And if that is so, then there can be an inference from such an
utterance to the truth of an assertion. And here the form "I
thought I knew" is being overlooked.-But if this latter is
inadmissible, then a mistake in the assertion must be logically
impossible too. And anyone who is acquainted with the
language-game must realize t h i s a n assurance from a reliable
man that he hows cannot contribute anything.
2 1.

C

It would surely be remarkable if we had to believe the reliable
person who says "I can't be wrong"; or who says "I am not
wrong".
22.

If I don't know whether someone has two hands (say,
whether they have 'been amputated or not) I shall believe Gs
assurance that he has two hands, if he is trustworthy. And if he
says he hows it, that can only signify to me that he has been
able to make sure, and hence that his arms are e.g. not still
concealed by coverings and bandages, etc. etc. My bdieving the
trustworthy man stems from my admitting that it is possible for
him to make sure. But someone who say<that perhaps there are
no physical objects makes no such admission.
23.

The idealist's question would be something like: "What right
have I not to doubt the existence of my hands?" (And to that the
answer can't be: I h o w that they exist.) But someone who asks
such a question is overlooking the fact that a doubt about existence
only works in a language-game. Hence, that we should first have
to ask: what would such a doubt be like?, and don't understand
this straight off.
24.

One may be wrong even about "there being a hand here".
Only in particular circumstances is it impossible.-"Even in a
calculation one can be wrong--only in certain circumstances one
can't."
25.

26. But can it be seen from a rule what circumstances logically
exclude a mistake in the employment of rules of calculation?
What use is a rule to us here? Mightn't we (in turn) go wrong
in applying it 3

27. If, however, one wanted to give something like a rule
here, then it would contain the expression "in normal circumstances". And we recognize normal circumstances but cannot
precisely describe them. At most, we can describe a range of
abnormal ones.
What is 'learning a rule' ?-This.
What is 'making a mistake in applying it' ?-This.
is pointed to here is something indeterminate.
28.

And what

Practice in the use of the rule also shews what is a mistake
in its employment.
29:

When someone has made sure of something, he says: "Yes,
the calculation is right", but he did not infer that from his condition of certainty. One does not infer how things are from one's
own certainty.
Certainty is as it w e a tone of voice in which one declares
how things are, but one does not infer from the tone of voice
that one is justified.
30.

The propositions which one comes back to again and again
as if bewitched-these I should like to expunge from philosophical
language.
31.

It's not a matter of Moore's knowing that there's a hand there,
but rather we should not understand him if he were to say "Of
course I may be wrong about this". We should ask "whit is it
like to make such a mistake as that?"--e.g. what's it like to
discover that it was a mistake?
3 2.

3 3.

Thus we expunge the sentences that don't get us any further.

34. If someone is taught to calculate, is he also taught that he
can rely on a calculation of his teacher's ? But these explanations

must after all sometime come to an end. Will he also be taught
that he can trust his senses-since he is indeed told in many cases
that in such and such a stlecial
case vou cannot trust them?A
Rule and exception.
.
I

But can't it be imagined that there should be no physical
objects? I don.'t know. And yet "There are physical objects" is
nonsense. Is it supposed to be an empirical proposition?jj.

And is thiJ an empirical proposition: "There seem to be physical
objects" ?
36. "A is a physical object" is a piece of instruction which we
give only to someone who doesn't yet understand either what
"A" means, or what "physical object" means. Thus it is instruction about the use of words, and "physical object" is a logical
concept. (Like colour, quantity, . . .) And that is why no such
proposition as: "There are physical objects" can be formulated.
Yet we encounter such unsuccessful shots at every turn.

3 7. But is it an adequate answer to the scepticism of the idealist,

or the assurances of the realist, to say that "There are physical
objects" is nonsense? For them after all it is not nonsense. It
would, however, be an answer to say: this assertion, or its
opposite is a misfiring attempt to express what can't be expressed
like that. And that it does misfire can be shewn; but that isn't the
end of the matter. We need to realize that what presents itself to
us as the first expression of a difficulty, or of its solution, may as
yet not be correctly expressed at all. Just as one who has a just
censure of a picture to make will often at first offer the censure
where it does not belong, and an investigation is needed in order
to find the right point of attack for the critic.
38. Knowledge in mathematics: Here one has to keep on
reminding oneself of the unimportance of the 'inner process' or
'state' andY ask "Why should it 6e important ? What does it matter
to me?" What is interesting is how we use mathematical propositions.
39. This is how calculation is done, in such circumstances a
calculation is treated as absolutely reliable, as certainly correct.

Upon "I know that here is my hand" there may follow the
question "How do you know?" and the answer to that presupposes that t-,iJcan be known in that way. So, instead of "I
know that here is my hand", one might say "Here is my hand",
and then add how one knows.

40.

"I know where I am feeling pain", "I know that I feel it
here" is as wrong as "I know that I am in pain". But "I know
41.

where you touched my arm" is right.

42. One can say "He believes it, but it isn't so", but not "He
knows it, but it isn't so". Does this stem from the difference
between the mental states of belief and of knowledge? No.-One
may for example call "mental state" what is expGssed by tone
of voice in speaking, by gestures etc. It would thus bepossible to
speak of a mental state of conviction, and that may be the same
whether it is knowledge or false belief. To think that different
states must correspond to the words "believe" and "know"
would be as if one believed that different people had to correspond
to the word 66I9 , and the name "Ludwig", because the concepts
are different,
43. What sort of proposition is this: "We cannot have miscalculated in 12 x I 2 = 144" ? It must surely be a proposition of logic.
-But
now, is it not the same, or doesn't it come to the same,
as the statement 12 x I 2 = 144?
44. If you demand a rule from which it follows that there can't
have been a miscalculation here, the answer is that we did not
learn this through a rule, but by learning to calculate.
45 We got to know the nature of calculating by learning to
calculate.
46. But then can't it be described how we satisfy ourselves of
the reliability of a calculation? 0 yes! Yet no rule emerges when
we do so.-But the most important thing is: The rule is not
needed. Nothing is lacking. We do calculate according to a rule,
and that is enough.

47. This is how one calculates. Calculating is this. What we
learn at school, for example. Forget this transcendent certainty,
which is connected with your concept of spirit.
48. However, out of a host of calculations certain ones might
be designated as reliable once for all, others as not yet fixed.
And now, is this a logical distinction?
49. But remember: even when the calculation is something
fixed for me, this is only a decision for a practical purpose.
lo. Whendoes onesay,Iknowthat..
one has checked the calculation.

. x . . . -- . . .?When

11. What sort of proposition is: "What could a mistake here
be like!"? It would have to be a logical proposition. But it is a

logic that is not used, because what it iellH us is not learned
th;ough propositions.-lt is a logical proposition; for it does
describe the conceptual (linguistic) situation.
This situation is thus not the same for a proposition like
"At this distance from the sun there is a planet" and "Here is a
hand" (namely my own hand). The secbnd can't be called a
hypothesis. But there isn't a sharp boundary line between them.
12.

So one might grant that Moore was right, if he is interpreted
like this: a proposition saying that here is a physical object may
have the same logical status as one saying that here is a red patch.
j 3.

14. For it is not true that a mistake merely gets more and more
improbable as we pass from the planet to my own hand. No: at
some point it has ceased to be conceivable.
This is already suggested by the following: if it were not so,
it would also be conceivable that we should be wrong in every
statement about physical objects; that any we ever make are
mistaken.
So is the b~othcsispossible, that all the things around us
don't exist? Would that not be like the hypothesis of our having
miscalculated in all our calculations ?
$5.

16. When one says: "Perhaps this planet doesn't exist and the
light-phenomenon arises in some other way", then after all one
needs an example of an object which does exist. This doesn't
exist,-as for exumple does.
Or are we to say that cerainfy is merely a constructed point to
which some things approximate more, some less closely? No.
Doubt gradually loses its sense. This language-game just i5 like
that.
And everything descriptive of a language-game is part of logic.

. ..

17. Now might not "I b o w , I am not just surmising, that here
is my hand" be conceived as a proposition of grammar? Hence
not temporally
But in that case isn't it like this one: "I know, I am not just
surmising, that I am seeing red'' ?

.-

And isn't the consequence "So there are physical objects" like:
"SO there are colours" ?
If ''I know etc." is conceived as a grammatical proposition,
of course the I cannot be important. And it properly means
"There is no such thing as a doubt in this case" or "The expression
'I do not know' makes no sense in this case". And of course it
follows from this that "I h o w " makes no sense either.
5 8.

6'

'2

19. 'I know" is here a logical insight. Only realism can't be

proved by means of it.

60. It is wrong to say that the 'hypothesis' that thiJ is a bit of
paper would be confirmed or disconfirmed by later experience,
and that, in "I know that this is a bit of paper," the "I know"
either relates to such an hypothesis or to a logical determination.

...

61.
A meaning of a word is a kind of employment of it.
For it is what we learn when the word is incorporated into our
language.
A

62. That is why there exists a correspondence between the
concepts 'rule' and 'meaning'.
63. If we imagine the facts otherwise than as they are, certain
language-games lose some of their importance, while others
become important. And in this way there is an alteration-a
gradual one-in the use of the vocabulary of a language.
64. Compare the meaning of a word with the 'function' of an
official. And 'different meanings' with 'different functions'.

61. When language-games change, then there is a change in
concepts, and with the concepts the meanings of words change.
66. I make assertions about reality, assertions which have
different degrees of assurance. How does the degree of assurance
come out? What conseauences has it ?
We may be dealing, fGr example, with the certainty of memory,
or again of perception. I may be sure of something, but still
know what test might convince me of error. I am e.g. quite sure
of the date of a b&le, but if I should find a different date in a
-

recognized work of history, I should alter my opinion, and this
would not mean I lost all faith in judging.
67. Could we imagine a man who keeps on making mistakes
where we regard a mistake as ruled out, and in fact never encounter
one ?
E.g. he says he lives in such and such a place, is so and so old,
comes from such and such a city, and he speaks with the same
certainty (giving all the tokens of it) as I do, but he is wrong.
But what is his relation to this error? What am I to suppose?
The question is: what is the logician to say here?

69. I should like to say: '?f I am wrong about this, I have no
guarantee that anything I say is true." But others won't say that
about me, nor will I say it about other people.
70. For months I have lived at address A, I have read the name
of the street and the number of the house countless times, have
received countless letters here and given countless people the
address. If I am wrong about it, the mistake is hardly less than if
I were (wrongly) to believe I was writing Chinese and not
German.
71. If my friend were to imagine one day that he had been
living for a long time past in such and such a place, etc. etc., I
should not call this a mistake, but rather a mental disturbance,
perhaps a transient one.

72' Not every false belief of this sort is a mistake.
73. But what is the difference between mistake and mental
disturbance? Or what is the difference between my treating it as
a mistake and my treating it as mental disturbance?

74. Can we say: a mi~takedoesn't only have a cause, it also has
a ground? I.e., roughly: when someone makes a mistake, this
can be fitted into what he knows aright.
75. Would this be correct: If I merely believed wrongly that there
is a table here in front of me, this might still be a mistake; but if
I believe wrongly that I have seen tGs table, or one like it, every
day for several months past, and have regularly used it, that isn't
a mistake?

76. Naturally, my aim must be to say what the statements one
would like to make here, but cannot make significantly.

77. Perhaps I shall do a multiplication twice to make sure, or
perhaps get someone else to work it over. But shall I work it
over again twenty times, or get twenty people to go over it?
And is that some sort of negligence? Would the certainty really
be greater for being checked twenty times?
And can I give a reu~onwhy it isn't?
79. That I am a man and not a woman can be verified, but if I
were to say I was a woman, and then tried to explain the error by,
saying I hadn't checked the statement, the explanation would
not be accepted.
The &a/tb of my statements is the test of my unde~sfanding
of these statements.
80.

That is to say: if I make certain false statements, it becomes
uncertain whether I understand them.
81.

82. What counts as an adequate test of a statement belongs to

logic. It belongs to the description of the language-game.
The t~a/thof certain empirical propositions belongs to our
frame of reference.
8 3.

84. Moore says he h o w s that the earth existed long before his
birth. And put like that it seems to be a personal statement about
him, even if it is in addition a statement about the physical world.
Now it is philosophically uninteresting whether Moore knows
this or that, but it is interesting that, and how, it can be known.
If Moore had informed us that he knew the distance separating
certain stars, we might conclude from that that he had made some
specialinvestigations, and we shall want to know what these were.
But Moore chooses precisely a case in which we all seem to know
the same as he, and without being able to say how. I believe e.g.
that I know as much about this matter (the existence of the earth)
as Moore does, and if he knows that it is as he says, then I know
it too. For it isn't, either, as if he had arrived at his proposition

by pursuing some line of thought which, while it is open to me,
I have not in fact pursued.

.
And what goes into someone's knowing this? Knowledge
of history, say ? He must know what it means to say: the earth
85

has already existed for such and such a length of time. For not
any intelligent adult must know that. We see men building and
demolishing houses, and are led to ask: "How long has this house
been here?" But how does one come on the idea of askine this
about a mountain, for example? And have all men the m&n;
of
the earth as a body, which &ay come into being and pass away?
Why shouldn't I think of the earth as flat, but extending: without
endOinevery direction (including depth)? But in thatYcase one
might still say "I know that this mountain existed long before
my birth."-But suppose I met a man who didn't believe that?
86. Suppose I replaced Moore's "I know" by "I am of the unshakeable conviction" ?
87. Can't an assertoric sentence, which was capable of functioning as an hypothesis, also be used as a foundation for research
and action? 1.e. can't it simply be isolated from doubt, though'
not according to any explicit rule? It simply gets assumed as a
truism, never called in question, perhaps not evenever formulated.

It may be for example that all enquiry on our part is set so as
to exempt certain ~ropositionsfrom doubt. if thev are ever formulated. TLey lie apkt grom the route traveiled by enquiry.
88.

89. One would like to say: "Everything speaks for,3 and nothing
against the earth's having existed long before.
Yet might I not believe the contrary after all? But the question
is: What would the practical effects of this belief be?-Perhaps
someone says: "That's not the point. A belief is what it is whether
it has any practical effects or not." One thinks: It is the same
adjustment of the human mind anyway.

...

2

has a primitive meaning similar to and related to
90. "I know"
<<
''I see ( wissen", "videre"). And "I knew he was in the room,
but he wasn't in the room" is like "I saw him in the room, but
he wasn't there". "I know" is supposed to express a ,relation, not
'9

between me and the sense of a proposition (like "I believe") but
between me and a fact. So that &e&ct is taken into my consdousness. (Here is the reason why one wants to say that nothing that
goes on in the outer world is really known, but only what happens
in the domain of what are called sense-data.) This would give us
a picture of knowing as the perception of an outer event though
visual rays which project it as it is into the eye and the consciousne&. Only thin 'the question at once arises whether one
can be certain of this projection. And this picture does indeed
show how our imagination presents knowledge, but not what lies
at the bottom of this presentation.
91. If Moore says he knows the earth existed etc., most of us
will grant him that it has existed all that time, and also believe
him when he says he is convinced of it. But has he also got the
right ground for his conviction ? For if not, then after all he doesn't
know (Russell).
g2* However, we can ask: May someone have telling grounds
for believing that the earth has only existed for a short time, say
since his own birth?-Suppose he had always been told that,would he have any good reason to doubt it? Men have believed
that they could make rain; why should not a king be brought up
in the belief that the world began with him? And if Moore and
this king were to meet and discuss, could Moore really prove his
belief to be the right one? I do not say that Moore could not
convert the king to his view, but it would be a conversion of a
special kind; the king would be brought to look at the world in
a different way.
Remember that one is sometimes convinced of the correctness
of a view by its simplicity or gmmetry, i.e, these arewhat induce one
to go over to this point of view. One then simply says something
like: "That's how it must be.''
93. The propositions presenting what Moore 'hows' are all of
such a kind that it is difficult to imagine why anyone should believe
the contrary. E.g. the proposition &at Moore has spent his whole
life in close proximity to the earth.-Once more I can speak of
myself here instead of speaking of Moore. What could induce me
to believe the opposite? Either a memory, or having been told.-

Everything that I have seen or heard gives me the conviction that
no man has ever been far from the ekth. Nothing in my picture
of the world speaks in favour ot the opposite.
1

1

.

94. But I did not get my picture of the world by satisfying
myself of its correctness: nor do I have it because I am satisfied
of its correctness. No: i t is the inherited background against
which I distinguish between true and false.

.

91 The propositions describing this world-picture might be
Dart of a kind of mvtholoev. And their role is like that of rules
of a game; and the game c& be learned purely practically, without
learning any explicit rules.

96. It might be imagined that some propositions, of the form
of empirical propositions, were hardened and functioned as
channels for such empirical propositions as were not hardened
but fluid; and that this relation altered with time, in that fluid
propositions hardened, and hard ones became fluid.
97. The mythology may change back into a state of flux, the
river-bed of thoughts may shift. But I distinguish between the
movement of the waters on the river-bed and the shift of the bed
itself; though there is not a sharp division of the one from the
other.
But if someone were to sav "So logic too is an em~irical
science" he would be wrong. ye; this is ryght: the same pioposition may get treated at one time as something to test by experience,
at another as a rule of testing.
99. And the bank of that river consists partly of hard rock,
subject to no alteration or only to an imperceptible one, partly of
sand, which now in one place now in another gets washed away,
or deposited.
The truths which Moore says he knows, are such as,
roughly speaking, all of us know, if he knows them.
100.

Such a proposition might be e.g. "My body has never
disappeared and reappeared again after an interval."
101.

Might I not believe that once, without knowing it, perhaps
in a state of unconsciousness, I was taken far away from the earth
102.

-that other people even know this, but do not mention it to
me? But this would not fit into the rest of my convictions at all.
Not that I could describe the system of these convictions. Yet
my convictions do form a system, a structure.
103. And now if I were to say "It is my unshakeable conviction that etc.", this means in the present case too that I have not
consciously arrived at the conviction by following a particular
line of thought, but that.it is anchored in all my questions and
anwers, so anchored that I cannot touch it.
104. I am for example also convinced that the sun is not a hole

in the vault of heaven.
All testing, all confirmation and disconfirmation of a
hypothesis takes place already within a system. And this system
is not a more or less arbitrary and doubtful point of departure
for all our arguments: no, it belongs to the essence of what we
call an argumint. The system is norso much the point of departure, as the element in which arguments have their life.
IO~.

rob. Suppose some adult had told a child that he had been on
the moon. The child tells me the story, and I say it was only a
joke, the man hadn't been on the moon; no one has ever been
on the moon; the moon is a long way off and it is impossible to
climb up there or fly there.-If now the child insists, saying
perhaps there is a way of getting there which I don't know, etc.
what reply could I make to him? What reply could I make to
the adults of a tribe who believe that people sometimes go to the
moon (perhaps that is how they interpret their dreams), and who
indeed grant that there are no ordinary means of climbing up to
it or flying there?-But a child will not ordinarily stick to such a
belief and will soon be convinced by what we tell him seriously.

107. Isn't this altogether like the way one can instruct a child
to believe in a God, or that none exists, and it will accordingly be
able to produce apparently telling grounds for the one or the
other ?

"But is there then no objective truth ? Isn't it true, or false,
that someone has been on the moon?" If we are thinking within
our system, then it is certain that no one has ever been on the
moon. Not merely is nothing of the sort ever seriously reported
to us by reasonable people, but our whole system of physics
forbids us to believe it. For this demands answers to the questions
"How did he overcome the force of gravity?" "How could he
live without an atmosphere.?" and a thousand others which could
not be answered. But suppose that instead of all these answers
we met the reply: "We don't know how one gets to the moon,
but those who get there know at once that they are there; and
even you can't explain everything." We should feel ourselves
intellectually very distant from someone who said this.
108.

109. "An empirical proposition can be tested" (we say). But
how ? and through what?
What coatzt.r as its test ?-"But is this an adequate test ?
And, if so, must it not be recognizable as such in logic?''As if giving grounds did not come to an end sometime. But the
end is not an ungrounded presupposition: it is an ungrounded
way of acting.
I 10.

"I know that I have never been on the moon." That sounds
quite different in the circumstances which actually hold, to the
way it would sound if a good many men had been on the moon,
and some perhaps without knowing it. In thiJ case one could give
grounds for this knowledge. Is there not a relationship here
similar to that between the general rule of multiplying and
particular multiplications that have been carried out ?
I want to say: my not having been on the moon is as sure a
thing for me as any grounds I could give for it.
I I I.

And isn't that what Moore wants to say, when he says he
knows all these things?-But is his knowing it really what is in
question, and not rather that some of these propositions must be
solid for us?
I 12.

When someone is trying to teach us mathematics, he will
not begin by assuring us that he know$ that a +b = b +a.
I I 3.

If you are not certain of any fact, you cannot be certain of
the meaning of your words either.
I 14.

II5 .

If you tried to doubt everything you would not get as far

as doubting anything. The game of doubting itself presupposes
certainty.

..

Instead of "I know .", couldn't Moore have said: "It
stands fast for me that ."? And further: "1t.stands fast for me
and many others.
I r 6.

. ..

2,

..

Why is it not possible for me to doubt that I have never
been on the moon? And how could I try to doubt it?
First and foremost, the supposition that perhaps I have been
there would strike me as idle. Nothing would follow from it,
nothing be explained by it. It would not tie in with anything in
mv life.
When I say "Nothing speaks for, everything against it," this
presupposes a principle of speaking for and against. That is, I
must be able to say what WOZIZ~speak for it.
I r 7.

J

Now would it be correct to say: So far no one has opened
my skull in order to see whether there is a brain inside; but everything speaks for, and nothing against, its being what they would
find there ?
I 18.

But can it also be said: Everything speaks for, and nothing
against the table's still being there when no one sees it? For
what does speak for it?
I 19.

But if anyone were to doubt it, how would his doubt come
out in practice? And couldn't we peacefully leave him to doubt
it, since it makes no difference at all?
120.

121.

Can one say: "Where there is no doubt there is no know-

ledge either" ?
I 22.

Doesn't one need grounds for doubt ?

I 23.

Wherever I look, I find no ground for doubting that.

124.

I want to say: We use judgments as principles of judgment.

...

If a blind man were to ask me "Have you got two hands ?"
I should not make sure by looking. If I were to have any doubt
of it, then I don't know why I should trust my eyes. For why
shouldn't I test my eyes by looking to find out whether I see my
I 25.

125

I 8e

two hands? Wbat is to be tested by what? (Who decides what
stands fast ?)
And what does it mean to say that such and such stands fast?

I am not more certain of the meaning of my words than I
am of certain judgments. Can I doubt that this colour is called
"blue" ?
(My) doubts form a system.
127. For how do I know that someone is in doubt? How do I
know that he uses the words "I doubt it" as I do?
I 28. From a child up I learnt to judge like this. This is judging.
I zG.

129. This is how I learned to judge; this I got to know a$
judgment.
130. But isn't it experience that teaches us to judge like thiJ,
that is to sav, that it is correct to judge like this? But how does
experience &ch us, then ? We may heZve it from experience, but
experience does not direct us to derive anything from experience.
If it is the ground of our judging like this, and not just the cause,
still we do not have a ground for seeing this in turn as a ground.
No, experience is not the ground for our game of judging.
Nor is its outstanding success.
132, Men have judged that a king can make rain; we say this
contradicts all experience. Today they judge that aeroplanes
and the radio etc. are means for the closer contact of peoples and
the spread of culture.
I 3 3. Under ordinary circumstances I do not satisfy myself that
I have two hands by seeing how it looks. W bnot ? Has experience
shown it to be unnecessary? Or (again): Have we in some way
learnt a universal law of induction, and do we trust it here too ?But why should we have learnt one w i v e r d law &st, and not
the special one straight away?
I 3 I.

134. After putting a book in a drawer, I assume it is there,

..

unless. . "Experience always proves me right. There is no well
attested case of a book's (simply) disappearing." It has ofm
happened that a book has never turned up again, although we

thought we knew for certain where it was.-But experience
does really teach that a book, say, does not vanish away. (E.g.
gradually evaporate.) But is it this experience with books etc.
that leads us to assume that such a book has not vanished
away? Well, suppose we were to find that under particular novel
circumstances books did vanish away.-Shouldn't we alter our
assumption? Can one give the lie to the effect of experience on
our system of assumption ?
But do we not simply follow the principle that what has
always happened will happen again (or something like it) ? What
does it mean to follow this principle? Do we reallv introduce it
into our reasoning? Or is It me;ely the n a t d I& which our
inferring apparently follows? This latter it may be. It is not an
item in our considerations.
I3 5.

When Moore says he how^ such and such, he is really
enumerating a lot of embirid propositions which we affirm
without special testing; proposltlons, that is, which have a
peculiar logical role in the system of our empirical propositions.
I 36.

U

L

.I.

137. Even if the most trustworthy of men assures me that he
knows things are thus and so, this by itself cannot satisfy me
that he does know. Only that he believes he knows. That is why
Moore's assurance that he knows
does not interest us. The
propositions, however, which Moore retails as examples of such
known truths are indeed interesting. Not because anyone knows
their truth, or believes he knows them, but because they all have
a ~imiZarrole in the system of our empirical judgments.

...

We don't, for example, arrive at any of them as a result of
investigation.
There are e.g. historical investigations and investigations into
the shape and also the age of the earth, but not into whether the
earth has existed during the last hundred years. Of course many
of us have information about this period from our parents and
grandparents; but mayn't they be wrong ?-"Nonsensel"
one
will say. "How should all these people be wrong?"-But is that
an argument? Is it not simply the rejection of an idea? And
I 38.

perhaps the determination of a concept? For if I speak of a
possible mistake here, this changes the role of "mistake" and
cCtruth"in our lives.
139. Not only rules, but also examples are needed for establishing a practice. Our rules leave loop-holes open, and the practice
has to speak for itself.
140. We do not learn the practice of making empirical judgments
by learhing rules: we are taughtjudgmetlts and their connexion
with other judgments. A totality of judgments is made plausible
to us.

141. When we first begin to believe anything, what we believe
is not a single proposition, it is a whole system of propositions.
(Light dawns gradually over the whole.)

142. It is not single axioms that strike me as obvious, it is a
system in which consequences and premises give one another
mz/tuaZ support.

I am told, for example, that someone climbed this mountain
many years ago. Do I always enquire into the reliability of the
teller of this storv, and whether the mountain did exist years
ago? A child l a m s there are reliable and unreliable informants
much later than it learns facts which are told it. It doesn't learn
at aZ2 that that mountain has existed for a long time: that is, the
question whether it is so doesn't arise at all. It swallows this
consequence down, so to speak, together with what it learns.
144. The child learns to believe a host of things. 1.e. it learns

to act according to these beliefs. Bit by bit there forms a system of
what is believed, and in that system some things stand unshakeably
fast and some are more or less liable to shift. What stands fast
does so, not because it is intrinsically obvious or convincing; it
is rather held fast by what lies around it.
145. One wants to say CCAZZ
my experiences shew that it is so".
But how do they do that? For that proposition to which they
point itself belongs to a particular interpretation of them.
"That I regard this proposition as certainly true also
characterizes my interpretation of experience."

146. We form the picture of the earth as a ball floating free in
space and not altering essentially in a hundred years. I said "We
form thepicture etc." and this picture now helps us in the judgment
of various situations.
I may indeed calculate the dimensions of a bridge, sometimes
calculate that here things are more in favour of a bridge than a
ferry,.etc.. .etc.,-but somewhere I must begin with an assumption
or a decision.
147. The picture of the earth as a ball is a good picture, it proves
itself everywhere, it is also a simple picture-in short, we work
with it without doubting it.

148. Why do I not satisfy myself that I have two feet when I
want to get up from a chair? There is no why. I simply don't.
This is how I act.
149. My judgments themselves characterize the way I judge,
characterize the nature of judgment.
How does someone judge which is his right and which his
left hand? How do I know that my judgment will agree with
someone else's? How do I know that this colour is blue? If I
don't tmst myserf here, why should I trust anyone else's judgment?
Is there a why? Must I not begin to trust somewhere? That is to
say: somewhere I must begin with not-doubting; and that is not,
so to speak, hasty but excusable: it is part of judging.
I0 .

I 5 I.

I should like to say: Moore does not h o w what he asserts

he knows, but it stands fast for him, as also for me; regarding it as
absolutely solid is part of our method of doubt and enquiry.

I do not explicitly learn the propositions that stand fast
for me. I can discover them subsequentlv like the axis around which
I 2.

a body rotates. This axis is not'fixed'in the sense that anything
holds it fast, but the movement around it determines its
immobility.
153- No one ever taught me that my hands don't disappear
when I am not paying attention to them. Nor can I be said to

presuppose the truth of this proposition in my assertions etc.,
(as if they rested on it) while it only gets sense from the rest of
our procedure of asserting.

There are cases such that, if someone gives signs of doubt
where we do not doubt, we cannot confidently understand his
signs as signs of doubt.
1.e.: if we are to understand his signs of doubt as such, he may
give them only in particular cases and may not give them in
others.
I 54.

In certain circumstances a man cannot make a mistake.
("Can" is here used logically, and the proposition does not mean
that a man cannot say anything false in those circumstances.)
If Moore were to pronounce the opposite of those propositions
which he declares certain, we should not just not share his opinion:
we should regard him as demented.
I j 5.

156. In order to make a mistake, a man must already judge in
conformity with mankind.
Suppose a man could not remember whether he had always
had five fingers or two hands ? Should we understand him?
Could we be sure of understanding him?
I 5 7.

Can I be making a mistake, for example, in thinking that
the words of which this sentence is composed are English words
whose meaning I know?
I j 8.

I 5 9.

As children we learn facts ; e.g., that every human being
has a brain, and we take them on trust. I believe that there is an
island, ~usiralia,of such-and-such a shape, and so on and so on;
I believe that I had great-grandparents, that the people who
gave themselves out as my parents really were my parents, etc.
This belief may never have been expressed; even. the thought that
it was so, never thought.
160. The child learns by believing the adult. Doubt comes afer
belief.
161. I learned an enormous amount and accepted it on human
authority, and then I found some things confirmed or disconfirmed by my own experience.
162. In general I take as true what is found in text-books, of
geography for example. Why? I say: All these facts have been
confirmed a hundred times over. But how do I know that? What
is my evidence for it? I have a world-picture. Is it true or false?
Above all it is the substratum of all my enquiring and asserting.

The propositions describing it are not all equally subject to
testing.
163. Does anyone ever test whether this table remains in
existence when no one is paying attention to it?
We check the story of Napoleon, but not whether all the reports
about him are based on sense-deception, forgery and the like.
For whenever we test anything, we are already presupposing
something that is not tested. Now am I to say that the experiment
which perhaps I make in order to test the truth d a proposition
presupposes the truth of the proposition that the apparatus I
believe I see is really there (and the like) ?
164. Doesn't testing come to an end?
161. One child might say to another: "I know that the earth
is already hundreds of years old" and that would mean: I have
learnt it.
166.
.believing.
.. .The difficulty is to realize the groundlessness of our
167. It is clear that our empirical propositions do not all have
the same status, since one can lay down such a proposition and
turn it from an empirical proposition into a norm of description.
Think of chemical investigations. Lavoisier makes experiments
with substances in his laboratory and now he concludes that this
and that takes place when there is burning. He does not say that
it might happen otherwise another time. He has got hold of a
definite world-picture-not
of course one that he invented:
he learned it as a child. I say world-picture and not hypothesis,
because it is the matter-of-course foundation for his research and
as such also goes unmentioned.
168. But now, what part is played by the presupposition that a
substance A always reacts to a substance B in the same way, given
the same circumstances? Or is that part of the definition of a
substance ?
169. One might think that there were propositions declaring
that chemistry is ~ossible.And these would be propositions of a
natural scienfe. ~ b what
r should they be suppoked by, if not by
experience?
170. I believe what people transmit to me in a certain manner.
In this way I believe geographical, chemical, historical facts etc.

That is how I learn the sciences. Of course learning is based on
believing.
If you have learnt that Mont Blanc is 4000 metres high, if you
have looked it up on the map, you say you h o w it.
And can it now be said: we accord credence in this way because
it has proved to pay?
I 71.

A principal ground for Moore to assume that he never was

on the moon is that no one ever was on the moon or could come
there; and this we believe on grounds of what we learn.
172. Perhaps someone says "There must be some basic principle
on which we accord credence", but what can such a principle
accomplish ? Is it more than a natural law of 'taking for true' ?

.
Is it maybe in my power what I believe ? or what I unshakeably believe ?
I 73

I believe that there is a chair over there. Can't I be wrong?
But, can I believe that I am wrong? Or can I so much as bring it
under consideration?-And mightn't I also hold fast to my
belief whatever I learned later on?! But is my belief thengrounded?
174. I act with complete certainty. But this certainty is my own.
I7 j. "I know it" I say to someone else; and here there is a
justification. But there is none for my belief.
176. Instead of "I know it" one may say in some cases "That's
how it is-rely upon it." In some cases, however "I learned it
years and years ago"; and sometimes: "I am sure it is SO."
177. What I know, I believe.
178. The wrong use made by Moore of the proposition "I

. .."

know
lies in his regarding it as an utterance as little subject
to doubt as "I am in pain". And since from "I know it is so"
there follows "It is so", then the latter can't be doubted either.
I79. It would be correct
to say: "I believe
2,
truth; but "I know.
not.

..

.. ." has subjective

O r again "I believe
know.. 2 2
180.

.

. . ." is an 'expression',

Suppose Moore had said "1 swear
know..
181.

..
99

but not "I

.. ." instead

of "I

The more primitive idea is that the earth never had a
beginning. No child has reason to ask himself how long the
earth has existed, because all change takes place on it. If what is
called the earth really came into existence at some time-which is
hard enough to picture-then one naturally assumes the beginning as having been an inconceivably long time ago.
182.

"It is certain that after the battle of Austerlitz Napoleon. . . .
Well, in that case it's surely also certain that the earth existed
then."
I 8 3.

184. "It is certain that we didn't arrive on this planet from
another one a hundred years ago." Well, it's as certain as such
things are.

It would strike me as ridiculous to want to doubt the
existence of Napoleon; but if someone doubted the existence of
the earth rjo years ago, perhaps I should be more willing to
listen, for now he is doubting our whole system of evidence. It
does not strike me as if this svstem were more certain than a
certainty within it.
I 81.

d

186. "I might suppose that Napoleon never existed and is a
fable, but not that the earth did not exist 150 years ago."
187. "Do you h o w that the earth existed then?"-"Of
course
I know that. I have it from someone who certainly knows all
about it."
It strikes me as if someone who doubts the existence of
the earth at that time is impugning the nature of all historical
evidence. And I cannot say of this latter that it is definitely
correct,
I 88.

I 89.

At some point one has to pass from explanation to mere
description.
190. What we call historical evidence points to the existence of
the earth a long time before my birth;-the opposite hypothesis
has nothing on its side.

191. Well, if everything speaks for an hypothesis and nothing
against it-is it then certainly true? One may designate it as
such.-But does it certainly agree with reality, with the facts?With this question you are already going round in a circle.
I 92.

T o be sure there is justification; but justification comes to
an end.
193. What does this mean: the truth of a proposition is
certain ?
I 94.

With the word "certain" we express complete conviction,
the total absence of doubt, and thereby we seek to convince other
people. That is ~ubjectivecertainty.
But when is something objectively certain? When a mistake is
not possible. But what kind of possibility is that? Mustn't
mistake be logically excluded ?
195. If I believe that I am sitting in my room when I am not,
then I shall not be said to have made a mistake. But what is the
essential difference between this case and a mistake?
196. Sure evidence is what we accept as sure, it is evidence that
we go by in acting surely, acting without any doubt.
What we call "a mistake" plays a quite special part in our
language games, and so too does what we regard as certain
evidence.
197. It would be nonsense to say that we regard something as
sure evidence because it is certainly true.
198. Rather, we must first determine the role of deciding for or
against a proposition.
199. The reason why the use of the expression "true or false"
has something misleading about it is that it is like saying "it
tallies with the facts or it doesn't", and the very thing that is in
question is what "tallying" is here.
zoo. Really "The proposition is either true or false" only means
that it must be possible to decide for or against it. But this does
not say what the ground for such a decision is like.
Suppose someone were to ask: 'Ts it really right for us to
rely on the evidence of our memory (or our senses) as we do?"
201.

Moore's certain propositions almost declare that we have a
right to rely upon this evidence.
202.

[Everything1 that we regard as evidence indicates that the
earth already existed long before my birth. The contrary hypothesis has nothing to confirm it at all.
If everything speaks for an hypothesis and nothing against it,
is it objectively certain? One can call it that. But does it necessarib
agree with the world of facts? At the very best it shows us what
"agreement" means. We find it difficult to imagine it to be false,
but also difficult to make use of it.]
What does this agreement consist in, if not in the fact that what
is evidence in these language games speaks for our proposition ? (Tractatzis Logico-PhiIosophicus)
203.

204. Giving grounds, however, justifying the evidence, comes
to an end;-but the end is not certain propositions' striking us
immediately as true, i.e. it is not a kind of seeing on our part;
it is our acting, which lies at the bottom of the language-game.
If the true is what is grounded, then the ground is not
true, nor yet false.
206. If someone asked us 'but is that true?" we might say "yes"
to him; and if he demanded grounds we might say "I can't give
you any grounds, but if you learn more you too will think the
same".
If this didn't come about, that would mean that he couldn't
for example learn history.
205.

207. "Strange coincidence, that every man whose skull has
been opened had a brain!"

I have a telephone conversation with New York. My
friend tells me that his young trees have buds of such and such a
kind. I am now convinced that his tree is.
Am I also convinced
that the earth exists?
209. The existence of the earth is rather part of the whole
pictm which forms the starting-point of belief for me.
210.
Does my telephone call to New York strengthen my
conviction that the earth exists ?
208.

.. .

Passage crossed out in MS. (Edtor~)

Much seems to be fixed, and it is removed from the traffic. It
is so to speak shunted onto an unused siding.
NOW it gives our way of looking at things, and our
researches, their form. Perhaps it was once disputed. But perhaps,
for unthinkable ages, it has belonged to the scaffolding of our
thoughts. (Every human being has parents.)
211.

In certain circumstances, for example, we regard a calculation as sufficiently checked. What gives us a right to do so?
Experience? May that not have deceived us? Somewhere we
must be finished with justification, and then there remains the
proposition that this is how we calculate.
212.

2 I 3.

Our 'empirical propositions' do not form a homogeneous

mass.
What prevents me from supposing that this table either
vanishes or alters its shape and colour when no one is observing
it, and then when someone looks at it again changes back to its
old condition?-"But who is going to suppose such a thing!"one would feel like saying.
214.

Here we see that the idea of 'agreement with reality' does
not have any clear application.
21 j.

216.

The proposition ''It is written".

If someone supposed that all our calculations were uncertain and that we could rely on none of them (justifying himself
by saying that mistakes are always possible) perhaps we would
say he was crazy. But can we say he is in error? Does he not just
react differently? We rely on calculations, he doesn't; we are sure,
he isn't.
218. Can I believe for one moment that I have ever been in the
stratosphere? No. So do I know the contrary, like Moore?
217.

There cannotbe any doubt about it for me as a reasonable
person.-That's it.219.

220.

The reasonable man does ?tot have certain doubts.

2t 2.

I cannot possibly doubt that I was never in the stratosphere.

Does that make me know it? Does it make it true?

For mightn't I be crazy and not doubting what I absolutely
ought to doubt?
223.

224. "I h o w that it never happened, for if it had happened I
could not possibly have forgotten it."
But, supposing it did happen, then it just would have been the
case that you had forgotten it. And how do you know that you
could not possibly have forgotten it? Isn't that just from earlier
experience ?
What I hold fast to is not one proposition but a nest of
propositions.
22j.

226. Can I give the supposition that I have ever been on the
moon any serious consideration at all ?
227. "ISthat something that one can forget ?I"
"In such circumstances, people do not say 'Perhaps we've
all forgotten', and the like, but rather they assume that
'9
2 2 8.

. ..

229. Our talk gets its meaning from the rest of our proceedings.
We are asking ourselves: what do we do with a statement
"1 kmw
."?For it is not a question of mental processes or
mental states.
And that is how one must decide whether something is knowledge or not.
230.

..

If someone doubted whether the earth had existed a
hundred years ago, I should not understand, for this reason: I
would not know what such a person would still allow to be
counted as evidence and what not.
231.

"We could doubt every single one of these facts, but we
could not doubt them all."
Wouldn't it be more correct to say: "we do not doubt them ng".
Our not doubting them all is simply our manner of judging,
and therefore of acting.
232.

233. If a child asked me whether the earth was already there
before my birth, I should answer him that the earth did not
begin only with my birth, but that it existed long, long before.
And I should have the feeling of saying something funny.

Rather as if the child had asked if such and such a mountain were
higher than a tall house that it had seen. In answering the question
I should have to be imparting a picture of the world to the person who asked it.
If I do answer the question with certainty, what gives me this
certainty ?
234. I believe that I have forebears, and that every human being
has them. I believe that there are various cities, and, quite
generally, in the main facts of geography and history. I believe
that the earth is a body on whose surface we move and that it no
more suddenly disappears or the like than any other solid body:
this table, this house, this tree, etc. If I wanted to doubt the
existence of the earth long before my birth, I should have to
doubt all sons of things that stand fast for me.

.

And that something stands fast for me is not grounded in
my stupidity or credulity.
23

. .."

236. If someone said "The earth has not long been
what
would he be impugning? Do I know?
Would it have to be what is called a scientific belief? Might it
not be a mystical one? Is there any absolute necessity for him to
be contradicting historical facts ? or even geographical ones ?

237. If I say "an hour ago this table didn't exist" I probably
mean that it was only made later on.
If I say "this mountain didn't exist then", I presumably mean
that it was only formed later on-perhaps by a volcano.
If I say "this mountain didn't exist half an hour ago", that is
such a strange statement that it is not clear what I mean. Whether
for example I mean something untrue but scientific. Perhaps you
think that the statement that the mountain didn't exist then is
quite clear, however one conceives the context. But suppose
someone said "This mountain didn't exist a minute ago, but an
exactly similar one did instead". Only the accustomed context
allows what is meant to come through clearly.

I might therefore interrogate someone who said that the
earth did not exist before his birth, in order to find out which of
238.

238

3 ==

my convictions he was at odds with. And then it might be that he
was contradicting my fundamental attitudes that were how it
was, and if I should have to put up with it.
Similarly if he said he had at some time been on the moon.
239. I believe that every human being has two human parents;
but Catholics believe that Jesus only had a human mother. And
other people might believe that there are human beings with no
parents, and give no credence to all the contrary evidence.
Catholics believe as well that in certain circumstances a wafer
completely changes its nature, and at the same time that all
evidence proves the contrary. And so if Moore said "I know that
this is wine and not blood", Catholics would contradict him.
240. What is the belief that all human beings have parents
based on? On experience. And how can I base this sure belief on
my experience? Well, I base it not only on the fact that I have
known the parents of certain people but on everything that I
have learnt about the sexual life of human beings and their
anatomy and physiology: also on what I have heard and seen of
animals. But then is that really a proof?
241. Isn't this an hypothesis, which, as I belieye, is again and
again completely confirmed?
242. Mustn't we say at every turn: "1 believe this with certainty" ?
243 One says "I know" when one is ready to give compelling
grounds. "I know" relates to a possibility of demonstrating the
truth. Whether someone knows something can come to light,
assuming that he is convinced of it.
But if what he believes is of such a kind that the grounds that
he can give are no surer than his assertion, then he cannot say
that he knows what he believes.
244. If someone says "I have a body", he can be asked "Who
is speaking here with this mouth?"
24j To whom does anyone say that he knows something? To
himself, or to someone else. If he says it to himself, how is it
distinguished from the assertion that he is sure that things are like
that? There is no subjective sureness that I know something. The

certainty is subjective, but not the knowledge. So if I say "I
know that I have two hands", and that is not supposed to express
just my subjective certainty, I must be able to satisfy myself that
I am right. But I can't do that, for my having two hands is not
less certain before I have looked at them than afterwards. But I
could say: 'That I have two hands is an irreversible belief." That
would express the fact that I am not ready to let anything count
as a disproof of this proposition.

"Here I have arrived at a foundation of all my beliefs."
"This position I will holdl" But isn't that, precisely, o d y because
I am completely convinced of it ?-What is 'being. completely convinced' like ?
246.

What would it be like to doubt now whether I have two
hands ? Why can't I imagine it at all? What would I believe if I
didn't believe that? So far I have no system
at all within which
this doubt might exist.
247.

I have arrived at the rock bottom of my convictions.
- ~ n one
d might almost say that these fhdation-walls are
carried by the whole house.
248.

249. One gives oneself a false picture of doubt.
My having two hands is, in normal circumstances, as certain
as anything that I could produce in evidence for it.
That is why I am not in a position to take the sight of my hand
as evidence for it.
2 j O.

Doesn't this mean: I shall proceed according to this belief
unconditionally, and not let anything confuse me ?
2 j I.

But it isn't just that I believe in this way tha.t I have two
hands, but that every reasonable person does.
2~2.

At the foundation of well-founded belief lies belief that is
not founded.
25 3.

Any 'reasonable' person behaves like this.
Doubting has certain characteristic manifestations, but
2jj
they are only characteristic of it in particular circumstances. If
2

j4.

.

25 5

33e

someone said that he doubted the existence of his hands, kept
looking at them from all sides, tried to make sure it wasn't 'all
done by mirrors', etc., we should not be sure whether we ought
to call that doubting. We might describe his way of behaving as
like the behaviour of doubt, but his game would not be ours.

2

6. On the other hand a language-game does change with time.

217. If someone said to me that he doubted whether he had a
body I should take him to be a half-wit. But I shouldn't know
what it would mean to try to convince him that he had one. And
if I had said something, and that had removed his doubt, I
should not know how or why.
21 8.

I do not know how the-sentence "I have,a body" is to be

used.
That doesn't unconditionally apply to the proposition that I
have always been on or near the surface of the earth.
219. Someone who doubted whether the earth had existed for
IOO years might have a scientific, or on the other hand a philosophical, doubt.
260. I would like to reserve the expression "I know" for the
cases in which it is used in normal linguistic exchange.

261. I cannot at present imagine a reasonable doubt as to the
existence of the earth during the last IOO years.

I can imagine a man who had grown up in quite special
circumstances and been taught that the earth came into being 10
years ago, and therefore believed this. We might instruct him:
the earth has long
etc.-We should be trying to give him our
picture of the world.
This would happen through a kind of persuasion.
262.

...

263. The schoolboy believes his teachers and his schoolbook^.
264. I could imagine Moore being captured by a wild tribe,
and their expressing the suspicion that he has come from somewhere between the earth and the moon. Moore tells them that he

knows etc. but he can't give them the grounds for his certainty,
because they have fantastic ideas of human ability to fly and
know nothing about physics.
This would be an occasion for
- making that Gatement.
26 j. But what does it say, beyond "I have never been to such
and such a place, and have compelling grounds for believing that" ?
266. And here one would still have to say what are compelling
grounds.
267. "I don't merely have the visual impression of a tree: I
h o w that it is a tree".

"1 know that this is a hand."-And
"Well, this, for example."
268.

what is a hand?-

269. Am I more certain that I have never been on the moon
than that I have never been in Bulgaria? Why am I so sure ? Well,
I know that I have never been anywhere in the neighbourhoodfor example I have never been in the Balkans.
270. "1 have compelling grounds for my certitude." These
grounds make the certitude objective.
271. What is a telling ground for something is not anything I
decide.
272. I know = I am familiar with it as a certainty.
273. But when does one say of something that it is certain?
For there can be dispute whether something i s certain; I mean,
when something is objctiveZy certain.
There are countless general empirical propositions that count
as certain for us.
274. One such is that if someone's arm is cut off it will not grow
again. Another, if someone's head is cut off he is dead and will
never live again.
Experience can be said to teach us these propositions. However, it does not teach us them in isolation: rather, it teaches us
a host of interdependent propositions. If they were isolated I
might perhaps doubt them, for I have no experience relating to
them.
27
. .J . If experience is the ground of our certainty, then naturally
it is past experience.

And it isn't for example just my experience, but other people's,
that I get knowledge from.
Now one might say that it is experience again that leads us to
give credence to others. But what experience makes me believe
that the anatomy and physiology books don't contain what is
false? Though it is true that this trust is backed up by my own
experience.
276. We believe, so to speak, that this great building exists,
and then we see, now here, now there, one or another small
corner of it.
277. '2 can't help believing.

...

99

278. "1 am comfortable that that is how things are."
279. It is quite sure that motor cars don't grow out of the earth.
We feel that if someone could believe the contrarv he could
believe evetytha'ig that we say is untrue, and could queition everything that we hold to be sure.
But how does this one belief hang together with all the rest?
We should like to say that someone who could believe that does
not accept our whole system of verification.
This system is something that a human being acquires by
means of observation and instruction. I intentionally do not say
cclearns".
After he has seen this and this and heard that and that, he
is not in a position to doubt whether. .
280.

..

1,L. W., believe, am sure, that my friend hasn't sawdust in
his body or in his head, even though I have no direct evidence of
my senses to the contrary. I am sure, by reason of what has been
said to me, of what I have read, and of my experience. T o have
28I .

doubts about it would seem to me madness-of course, this is
also in agreement with other people; but I agree with them.

I cannot say that I have good grounds for the opinion that
cats do not grow on trees or that I had a father and a mother.
If someo& has doubts about it-how is that supposed to have
come about? By his never, from the beginning, 6a'ving believed
that he had parents? But then, is that conceivable, u a l r s s he has
been taught-it ?
282.

283. For how can a child immediately doubt what it is taught?
That could mean only that he was incapable of learning certain
language games.
284. People have killed animals since the earliest times, used the

fur, bones etc. etc. for various purposes; they have counted
definitely on finding similar parts in any similar beast.
They have always learnt from experience; and we can see from
their actions that they believe certain things definitely, whether
they express this belief or not. By this I naturally do not want to
say that men should behave like this, but only that they do behave
like this.
If someone is looking for something and perhaps roots
around in a certain place, he shows that he believes that what he
is looking for is there.
281.

286. What we believe depends on what we learn. We all believe
that it isn't possible to get to the moon; but there might be
people who believe that that is possible and that it sometimes
happens. We say: these people do not know a lot that we know.
And, let them be never so sure of their belief-they are wrong
and we know it.
If we compare our system of knowledge with theirs then theirs
is evidently the poorer one by far.
287. The squirrel does not infer by induction that it is going to
need stores next winter as well. And no more do we need a law
of induction to justify our actions or our predictions.

I know, not just that the earth existed long before my
birth, but also that it is a large body, that this has been established,
that I and the rest of mankind have forebears, that there are books
about all this, that such books don't lie, etc. etc. etc. And I know
all this? I believe it. This bodv of knowledge has been handed on
to me and I have no grounds for doubting G,but, on the contrary,
all sorts of confirmation.
And why shouldn't I say that I know all this? Isn't that what
one does say?
288.

But not only I know, or believe, all that, but the others do
too. Or rather, I b e l k that they believe it.
289. I am firmly convinced that others believe, believe they
know, that all that is in fact so.
290. I myself wrote in my book that children learn to understand a word in such and such a way. Do I know that, or do I
believe it? Why in such a case do I write not "I believe etc." but
simply the indicative sentence ?
291. We know that the earth is round. We have definitively
ascertained that it is round.
We shall stick to this opinion, unless our whole way of seeing
nature changes. "How do you know that?"-I believe it.
292. Further experiments cannot g h the lie to our earlier ones,
at most they may change our whole way of looking at things.
293. Similarly with the sentence "water boils at ~oo"C."
294. This is how we acquire conviction, this is called "being
rightly convinced".
295. SO hasn't one, in this sense, a proof of the proposition?
But that the same thing has happened again is not a proof of it;
though we do say that it gives us a right to assume it.
296. This is what we cull an "empirical foundation" for our
assumptions.
297. For we learn, not just that such and such experiments had
those and those results, but also the conclusion which is drawn.
And of course there is nothing wrong in our doing so. For this
infened proposition is an instrument for a definite use.
298. W e are quite sure of it' does not mean just that every single
person is certain of it, but that we belong to a community which
is bound together by science and education.
299. We are satisfied that the earth is round.'
'* .

1o.g.j I
300. Not all corrections of our views are on the same level.
In English. Edr.

.

3
Supposing it wasn't true that the earth had already existed
long before I was born-how should we imagine the mistake
being discovered ?

It's no good saying "Perhaps we are wrong" when, if
no evidence is trustworthy, trust is excluded in the case of the
present evidence.
302.

303. If, for example, we have always been miscalculating, and
twelve times twelve isn't a hundred and forty-four, why should
we trust any other calculation?And of course that is wrongly put.

304. But nor am I making a mistake about twelve times twelve
being a hundred and forty-four. I may say later that I was confused just now, but not that I was making a mistake.
3oj. Here once more there is needed a step like the one taken

in relativity theory.
306. "I don't know if this is a hand." But do you know what
the word "hand" means? And don't say "I know what it means
now for me". And isn't it an empirical fact-that this word is
used like this?

307. And here the strange thing is that when I am quite certain
of how the words are used, have no doubt about it, I can still give
no grounds for my way of going on. If I tried I could give a
thousand, but none as certain as the very thing they were supposed to be grounds for.
308. 'Knowledge' and 'certainty' belong to different categories.
They are not two 'mental states' like, say 'surmising' and 'being
sure'. (Here I assume that it is meaningful for me to say "I know
what (e.g.) the word 'doubt' means" and that this sentence
indicates that the word "doubt" has a logical role.) What interests
us now is not being sure but knowledge. That is, we are interested in the fact that about certain empirical propositions no
doubt can exist if making judgments is to be possible at all. Or
again: I am inclined to believe that not everything that has the
form of an empirical proposition is one.

309. Is it that rule and empirical proposition merge into one
another ?
309

310. A pupil and a teacher. The pupil will not let anything be
explained to him, for he continually interrupts with doubts, for
instance as to the existence of things, the meaning of words, etc.
The teacher says "Stop interrupting me and do as I tell you. So
far your doubts don't make sense at all".
3 I I. Or imagine that the boy questioned the truth of history
(and everything that connects up with it)--and even whether the
earth had existed at all a hundred years before.
3 I 2. Here it strikes me as if this doubt were hollow. But in that
case-isn't belief in history hollow too ? No; there is so much that
this connects up with.
3 I 3. So is that what makes us believe a proposition? Wellthe grammar of "believe" just does hang together with the grammar of the proposition believed.
3 14. Imagine that the schoolboy really did ask "and is there a
table there even when I turn round, and even when no one is
there to see it?" Is the teacher to reassure him-and say "of
course there is!" ?
Perhaps the teacher will get a bit impatient, but think that
the boy will grow out of asking such questions.
3 I 1. That is to say, the teacher will feel that this is not really a
legitimate question at all.
And it would be just the same if the pupil cast doubt on the
uniformity of nature, that is to say on the justification of inductive
arguments.-The teacher would feel that this was only holding
them up, that this way the pupil would only get stuck and make
no progress.-And he would be right. It would be as if someone
were looking for some object in a room; he opens a drawer and
doesn't see it there; then he doses it again, waits, and opens it
once more to see if perhaps it isn't there now, and keeps on like
that. He has not learned to look for things. And in the same way
this pupil has not learned how to ask questions. He has not
learned the game that we are trying to teach him.
3 16. And isn't it the same as if the pupil were to hold up his

history lesson with doubts as to whether the earth really.

. . ..
9

This doubt isn't one of the doubts in our game. (But not
as if we chore this game!)
3 I 7.

12.3.5 I
318. 'The question doesn't arise at 1 . Its answer would

characterize a method. But there is no sharp boundary between
methodological propositions and propositions within a method.
319. But wouldn't one have to say then, that there is no sharp
boundary between propositions of logic and empirical propositions? The lack of sharpness is that of the boundary between
rde and empirical proposition.
Here one must, I believe, remember that the concept
'proposition' itself is not a sharp one.
320.

Isn't what I am saying: any empirical proposition can be
transformed into a postulate-and then becomes a norm of
description. But I am suspicious even of this. The sentence is
too general. One almost wants to say "any empirical proposition
can, theoretically, be transformed . . "2 but what does "theoretically" mean here? It sounds all too reminiscent of the
Tractatzrs.
321.

.

What if the pupil refused to believe that this
had been there beyond human memory?
We should say that he had no grout& for this suspicion.
322.

323. So rational suspicion must have grounds ?
We might also say: "the reasonable man believes this".

324. Thus we should not call anybody reasonable who believed
something in despite of scientific evidence.

.

When we say that we h o w that such and such . ., we
mean that any reasonable person in our position would -also
know it, that it would be a piece of unreason to doubt it. Thus
Moore too wants to say not merely that he knows that he etc. etc.,
but also that anyone endowed with reason in his position would
know it just the same.
-3 2 5
- .

3.26. But who says what it is reasonable to believe in this
situation ?

So it might be said: "The reasonable man believes: that
the earth has been there since long before his birth, that his life
has been spent on the surface of the earth, or near it, that he has
never, for example, been on the moon, that he has a nervous
system and various innards like all other people, etc., etc."
327.

328.

"I know it as I know that my name is L. W."

329. 'If he calls that in doubt-whatever
he will never learn this game'.
3 30. So here the sentence "Iknow
to believe certain things.

"doubt" means here-

..." expresses the readiness

3 3 I. If we ever do act with certainty on the strength of belief,

should we wonder that there is much we cannot doubt?

332. Imagine that someone were to say, without wanting to
phiiorophixe, "I don't know if I have ever been on the moon; I
don't remember ever having been there". (Why would this person
be so radically different from us ?)
In the first place-how would he know that he was on the
moon? How does he imagine it? Compare: "I do not know if I
was ever in the village of X." But neither could I say that if X
were in Turkey, for I know that I was never in Turkey.

3 3 3. I ask someone "Have you ever been in China?" He replies
"I don't know". Here one would surely say "You don't know?
Have you any reason to believe you might have been there at
some time ? Were you for example ever near the Chinese border ?
Or were your parents there at the time when you were gokg to
be born?"-Normally Europeans do know whether they have
been in China or not.

That is to say: only in such-and-such circumstances does a
reasonable person doubt that.
J 34.

3
The procedure in a court of law rests on the fact that
circumstances give statements a certain probability. The statement that, for example, someone came into the world without
parents wouldn't ever be taken into consideration there.

336. But what men consider reasonable or unreasonable alters.
At certain periods men find reasonable what at other periods they
found unreasonable. And vice versa.
But is there no objective character here?
Vev intelligent and well-educated people believe in the story
of creation in the Bible, while others hold it as proven false, and
the grounds of the latter are well known to the former.
3 3 7. One cannot make experiments if there are not some things
that one does not doubt. But that does not mean that one takes
certain presuppositions on trust. When I write a letter and post it,
I take it for granted that it will arrive-I expect this.
If I make an experiment I do not doubt the existence of the
apparatus before my eyes. I have plenty of doubts, but not that.
If I do a calculation I believe, without any doubts, that the figures
on the paper aren't switching of their own accord, and I also trust
my memory the whole time, and tmst it without any reservation.
The certainty here is the same as that of my never having been
on the moon.

3 38. But imagine people who were never quite certain of these
things, but said that they were v e v probably SO, and that it did not
pay to doubt them. Such a person, then, would say in my situation: "It is extremely unlikely that I have ever been on the
moon", etc., etc. How would the life of these people differ from
ours? For there are people who say that it is merely extremely
probable that water over a fire will boil and not freeze, and that
therefore strictly speaking what we consider impossible is only
improbable. What difference does this make in their lives? Isn't
it just that they talk rather more about certain things than the rest
of us?

339. Imagine someone who is supposed to fetch a friend from
the railwav station and doesn't sim~lvlook the train ut, in the
time-table'and go to the station atLt6eright time, butLsays: "I
have no belief that the train will really arrive, but I will go to the
station all the same." He does everything that the normal person
does, but accompanies it with doubts or with self-annoyance, etc.
3 0 . We know, with the same certainty with which we believe
any mathematical proposition, how the letters A and B are pro-

flounced, what the colour of human blood is called, that other
human beings have blood and call it "blood".
341. That is to say, the question^ that we raise and our doubts
depend on the fact that some propositions are exempt from doubt,
are as it were like hinges on which those turn.
3 42.

That is to say, it belongs to the logic of our scientific
investigations that certain things are in deed not doubted.
343. But it isn't that the situation is like this: We just can't
investigate everything, and for that reason we are forced to rest
content with assumption. If I want the door to turn, the hinges
must stay put.
344. My ife consists in my being content to accept many things.
345. If I ask someone "what colour do you see at the moment ?",
in order, that is, to learn what colour is there at the moment, I
cannot at the same time question whether the person I ask understands English, whether he wants to take me in, whether my
own memory is not leaving me in the lurch as to the names of
colours, and so on.
346. When I am trying to mate someone in chess, I cannot have
doubts about the pieces perhaps changing places of themselves
and my memory simultaneously playing tricks on me so that I
don't notice.
=j*3*51

347. "I know that that's a tree." Why does it strike me as if I
did not understand the sentence? though it is after all an extremely simple sentence of the most ordinary kind? It is as if I
could not focus my mind on any meaning. Simply because
I don't look for the focus where the meaning is. As soon as I
think of an everyday use of the sentence instead of a philosophical
one, its meaning becomes clear and ordinary.
Just as the words "I am here" have a meaning only in
certain contexts, and not when I say them to someone who is
sitting in front of me and sees me dearly,-and not because they
are superfluous, but because their meaning is not determined by
the situation, yet stands in need of such determination.
348.

3 49. CeIknow that that's a tree9'-this may mean all sorts of
things: I look at a plant that I take for a young beech and that
someone else thinks is a black-currant. He savs "that is a shrub";
I say it is a tree.-We see something in the &st which one of us
takes for a man, and the other says "I know that that's a tree".
Someone wants to test my eyes etc. etc.--etc. etc. Each time
the 'that' which I declare to be a tree is of a different kind.
But what when we express ourselves more precisely? For
example: "I know that that thing there is a tree, I can see it quite
clearly."-Let
us even suppose I had made this remark in the
context of a conversation (so that it was relevant when I made it);
and now, out of all context, I repeat it while looking at the tree,
and I add "I mean these words as I did five minutes ago". If
I added, for example, that I had been thinking of my bad eyes
again and it was a kind of sigh, then there would be nothing
puzzling about the remark.
For how a sentence is meant can be expressed by an expansion
of it and may therefore be made part of it.

"I know that that's a tree" is something a philosopher
might say to demonstrate to himself or to someone else that he
ktzotvs something that is not a mathematical or logical truth.
Similarly, someone who was entertaining the idea that he was
no use any more might keep repeating to himself "I can still do
this and this and this". If such thoughts often possessed him one
would not be surprised if he, apparently out of all context, spoke
such a sentence out loud. (But here I have already sketched a
background, a surrounding, for this remark, that is to say given
it a context.) But if someone, inquite heterogeneous circumstances,
called out with the most convincing mimicry: "Down with him!",
one might say of these words (and their tone) that they were a
pattern that does indeed have familiar applications, but that in
this case it was not even clear what latzguage the man in question
was speaking. I might make with my hand the movement I
should make if I were holding a hand-saw and sawing through a
plank; but would one have any right to call this movement
sutvitzg, out of all context?-(It might be something quite different!)
3 0

3 5 I. Isn't the question "Have these words a meaning?" similar
to "Is that a tool?" asked as one produces, say, a hammer? I
say "Yes, it's a hammer". But what if the thing that any of us
would take for a hammer were somewhere else a missile, for
example, or a conductor's baton? Now make the application
yourself.

3 j 2. If someone says, "I know that that's a tree" I may answer:
"Yes, that is a sentence. An English sentence. And what is it
supposed to be doing?" Suppose he replies: "I just wanted to
remind myself that I h o w things like that" ?

,

3 5 3. But suppose he said "I want to make a logical observation" ?
If a forester goes into a wood with his men and
says "Thir tree has got to be cut down, and this one and ibis
one"
what if he then observes "I know that that's a tree" ?
-But might not I say of the forester "He knows that that's a
tree-he doesn't examine it, or order his men to examine it"?
3 54. Doubting and non-doubting behaviour. There is the first

only if there is the second.

3 5 j. A mad-doctor (perhaps) might ask me "Do you know what
that is?" and I might reply "I know that it's a chair; I recognize
it, it's always been in my room". He says this, possibly, to test
not my eyes but my ability to recognize things, to know their
names and their functions. What is in question here is a kind of
knowing one's way about. Now it would be wrong for me to say
"I believe that it's a chair" because that would express my readi'?
ness for my statement to be tested. While "I know that it
implies bewilderment if what I said was not confirmed.

.. .

3 5 6. My 'mental state', the "knowing", gives me no guarantee
of what will happen. But it consists in this, that I should not
understand where a doubt could get a foothold nor where a
further test was possible.

3 5 7. One might say: " 'I know' expresses comfortabI~certainty,
not the certainty that is still struggling."
3 5 8. Now I would like to regard this certainty, not as something

akin to hastiness or superficiality, but as a form of life. (That is
very badly expressed and probably badly thought as well.)

3 5 9. But that means I want to conceive it as something that lies

beyond being justified or unjustified; as it were, as something
animal.
360. I KNOW that this is my foot. I could not accept any experience as proof to the contrary.-That may be an exclamation;
but what follow3 from it? At least that I shall act with a certainty
that knows no doubt, in accordance with my belief.
But I might also say: It has been revealed to me by God
that it is so. God has taught me that this is my foot. And therefore if anything happened that seemed to conflict with this
knowledge I should have to regard that as deception.
I

362. But doesn't it come out here that knowledge is related to
a decision?
363. And here it is difficult to find the transition from the
exclamation one would like to make, to its consequences in what
one does.
364. One might also put this question: "If you know that that
is your foot,-do you also know, or do you only believe, that no
future experience will seem to contradict your knowledge?"
(That is, that nothing will seem to youyoz~rseIfto do so.)
361. If someone replied: "I also know that it will never seem
to me as if anything contradicted that knowledgew,-what could
we gather from that, except that he himself had no doubt that
it would never happen ?366. Suppose it were forbidden to say "I know" and only
allowed to say "I believe I know"?
367. Isn't it the purpose of construing a word like "know"
analonouslv to "believe" that then opprobrium attaches to the
stateGent 'I know2' if the person wh6 kakes it is wrong?
As a result a mistake becomes something forbidden.
368. If someone says that he will recognize no experience as
proof of the opposite, that is after all a decisbn. It is possible that
he will act against it.

16.3.j 1
369. If I wanted to doubt whether this was my hand, how could
Z avoid doubting whether the word "hand" has any meaning?
So that is something I seem to h o w after all.
370. But more correctly: The fact that I use the word "hand"
and all the other words in my sentence without a second thought,
indeed that I should stand before the abyss if I wanted so
much as to try doubting their meanings-shews that absence of
doubt belongs to the essence of the language-game, that the
question "How do I know ." drags out the language-game, or
else does away with it.

..

371. Doesn't "1 know that that's a hand", in Moore's sense,
mean the same, or more or less the same, as : I can make statements like "I have a pain in this hand" or "this hand is weaker
than the other" or "I once broke this hand", and countless others,
in language-games where a doubt as to the existence of this hand
does not come in?
372. Only in certain cases is it possible to make an investigation
"is that really a hand ?" (or "my hand"). For "I doubt whether
that is really my (or a) hand" makes no sense without some more
precise determination. One cannot tell from these words alone
whether any doubt at all is meant-nor what kind of doubt.
373. Why should it be possible to have grounds for believifig
anything if it isn't possible to be certain ?
374. We teach a child "that is your hand", not "that is perhaps
[or "probably"] your hand". That is how a child learns the innumerable language-games that are concerned with his hand. An
investigation or question, 'whether this is really a hand' never
occurs to him. Nor, on the other hand, does he learn that he
knows that this is a hand.
371. Here one must realize that complete absence of doubt at
some point, even where we would say that 'legitimate' doubt can
exist, need not falsify a language-game. For there is also something like anothw arithmetic.
I believe that this admission must underlie any understanding
of logic.

3 76. I may claim with passion that I know that this (for example)

is my foot.

377. But this passion is after all something very rare, and there
is no trace of it when I talk of this foot in the ordinary way.
378. Knowledge is in the end based on acknowledgement.
379. I say with passion "I h o w that this is a foot"-but
does it mean?

what

I might go on: "Nothing in the world will convince me
of the opposite!" For me this fact is at the bottom of all knowledge. I shall give up other things but not this.
380.

3 8 I. This "Nothing in the world" is obviously an attitude which
one hasn't got towards everything one believes or is certain of.

That is not to say that nothing in the world will in fact be
able to convince me of anything else.
382.

383. The argument "I may be dreaming" is senseless for this
reason: if I am dreaming, this remark is being dreamed as welland indeed it is also being dreamed that these words have any
meaning.

3 84. Now what kind of sentence is "Nothing in the world

.. ." ?

3 8 5 . It has the form of a prediction, but of course it is not one
that is based on experience.

386. Anyone who says, with Moore, that he knows that so and
so . .-gives the degree of certainty that something has for him.
And it is important that this degree has a maximum value.

.

387. Someone might ask me: "How certain are you that that is
a tree over there; that you have money in your pocket; that that
is your foot ?" And the answer in one case might be "not certain",
in another "as good as certain", in the third '1can't doubt it".
And these answers would make sense even without any grounds.
I should not need, for example, to say: "I can't be certain whether
that is a tree because my eyes aren't sharp enough". I want to

say: it made sense for Moore to say "I know that that is a tree",
if he meant something quite particular by it.

[I believe it might interest a philosopher, one who can think
himself, to read my notes. For even if I have hit the mark only
rarely, he would recognize what targets I had been, ceaselessly
aiming at.]
3 88. Every one of us often uses such a sentence, and there is no

question but that it makes sense. But does that'mean it yields any
philosophical conclusion? Is it more of a poof of the existence
of external things, that I know that this is a hand, than that I
don't know whether that is gold or brass?
18.3.
389. Moore wanted to give an example to shew that one really
can know propositions about physical objects.-If there were a
dispute whether one could have a pain in such and such apart
of the body, then someone who just then had a pain in that spot
might say: "I assure you, I have a pain there now." But it would
sound odd if Moore had said: "I assure you, I know that's a
tree." A personal experience simply has no interest for us here.
3 90. All that is important is that it makes sense to say that one
knows such a thing; and consequently the assurance that one
does know it can't accomplish anything here.

391. Imagine a language-game %en
I call you, come in
through the door". In any ordinary case, a doubt whether there
really is a door there will be impossible.
What I need to shew is that a doubt is not necessary even
when it is possible. That the possibility of the language-game
doesn't depend on everything being doubted that can be doubted.
(This is connected with the role of contradiction in mathematics.)
392.

The sentence "I know that that's a tree" if it were said
outside its language-game, might also be a quotation (from an
English grammar-book perhaps).-"But
suppose I mean it while
I am saying it?" The old misunderstanding about the concept
'mean'.
393.

3 94. "This is one of the things that I cannot doubt."

"I know all that." And that will come out in the way I act
and in the way I speak about the things in question.
3 9 5.

396. In the language-game (z),' can he say that he knows that
those are building stones?--"No, but he doe5 know it."
397. Haven't I gone wrong and isn't Moore perfectly right?

Haven't I made the elementary mistake of confusing one's
thoughts with one's knowledge> Of course I do not &ink to
myself "The earth already existed for some time before my birth",
but do I h o w it any the less? Don't I show that I know it byalways drawing its consequences ?

398. And don't I know that there is no stairway in this house
going six floors deep into the earth, even though I have never
thought about it?

399. But doesn't my drawing the consequences only show that
I accept this hypothesis ?
19.3.
400. Here I am inclined to fight windmills, because I cannot yet
say the thing I really want to say.
401.

I want to sav: ~ropositionsof the form of empirical
d

A

propositions, and not o d y propositions of logic, form the
foundation of all operating with thoughts (with language)."I know. 9 ,
This observation is not of the form "I know.
states what I know, and that is not of logical interest.

..".

..

402. In this remark the expression "propositions of the form
of empirical propositions" is itself thoroughly bad; the statements
in question are statements about material objects. And they do
not serve as foundations in the same way as hypotheses which,
if they turn out to be false, are replaced by others.
. und schreib getrost
"Im Anfang war die Tat."2

. .

Pbilosopbical Imestigatiom I 2. Edr.
and write with confidence
"In the beginning was the deed."
Goethe, Fausd I. Trans,

...

403. To say of man, in Moore's sense, that he know^ something; that what he says is therefore unconditionally the truth,
seems wrong to me.-It is the truth only inasmuch as it i s an
unmoving foundation of his language-games.
404. I want to say: it's not tha.t on some points men know the
truth with pedect certainty. No: perfect certainty is onl.y a matter
of their attitude.
401. But of course there is still a mistake even here.
406. What I am aiming at is also found in the difference between
the casual observation "I know that that's a .", as it might be
used in ordinary life, and the same utterance when a philosopher
makes it.

..

.. ."

For when Moore savs "I know that that's
I want to
reply "you don't h o w anyIhinglm--and yet I would not say that
to anyone who was speaking without philosophical intention.
That is, I feel.(rightly?) that these two mean to say something
different,
407.

408. For if someone says he knows such-and-such, and this is
part of his philosophy-then his philosophy is false if he has
slipped up in this statement.
409. If I say "I know that that's a footw-what am I really
saying? Isn't the whole point that I am certain of the consequences
-that if someone else had been in doubt I might say to him
"you see-I told you so"? Would my knowledge still be worth
anything if it let me down as a due in action? And can't it let me
down?
20.3.

410. Our knowledge forms an enormous system. And only
within this system has a particular bit the value we give it.
If I say "we a ~ ~ ~that
m the
e earth has existed for many
years past" (or something similar), then of course it sounds strange
that we should a
~ such
5 a thing.
~
But in the entire system of
our language-games it belongs to the foundations. The assumption, one might say, forms the basis of action, and therefore,
naturally, of thought.
I

.

412. Anyone who is unable to imagine a case in which one
might say "I know that this is my hand" (and such cases are
certainly rare) might say that these words were nonsense. True,
he might also say "Of course I know-how could I not know ?"but then he would possibly be taking the sentence "this is my
hand" as an explumtian of the words "my hand".
413. For suppose you were guiding a blind man's hand, and
as you were guiding it along yours you said "this is my hand";
if he then said "are you sure?" or "do you know it is?", it
would take very special circumstances for that to make sense.
414. But on the other hand: how do I know that it is my hand?
Do I even here know exactly what it means to say it is my hand?When I say "how do I know?" I do not mean that I have the
least dotlbt of it. What we have here is a foundation for all my
action. But it seems to me that it is wrongly expressed by the
words "1 know".
41j. And in fact, isn't the use of the word "know" as a preeminently philosophical word altogether wrong? If "know" has
this interest, why not "being certain"? Apparently because it
would be too subjective. But isn't "know" just as subjective?
Isn't one misled simply by the grammatical peculiarity that C Cp Y Y
follows from ''I know p" ?
"I believe I know" would not need to express a lesser degree of
certainty.-True, but one isn't trying to express even the greatest
subjective certainty, but rather that certain propositions seem to
underlie all questions and all thinking.
416. And have we an example of this in, say, the proposition
that I have been living in this room for weeks past, that my
memory does not deceive me in this ?
-"certain beyond all reasonable doubt2'21.3.

417. "I know that for the last month I have had a bath every
day." What am I remembering? Each day and the bath each
morning? No. I know that I bathed each day and I do not derive
that from some other immediate datum. Similarly I say "I felt a

pain in my arm" without this locality coming into my consciousness in any other way (such as by means of an image).
41 8. Is my understanding only blindness to my own lack of
understanding? It often seems so to me.
419. If I say "1 have never been in Asia Minor", where do I
get this knowledge from? I have not worked it out, no one told
me; my memory tells me.-So I can't be wrong about it? Is
there a truth here which I how?-I cannot depart from this
judgment without toppling all other judgments with it.
420. Even a proposition like this one, that I am now living in
England, has these two sides: it is not a mistake-but on the other
hand, what do I know of England? Can't my judgment go all to
pieces ?
Would it not be possible that people came into my room and
all declared the opposite?-even gave me 'proofs' of it, so that I
suddenly stood there like a madman alone among people who
were all normal, or a normal person alone among: madmen?
Might I not then-suffer doubts a6out what at present seems at the
furthest remove from doubt?
421. I am in England.-Everything around me tells me so;
wherever and however I let my thoughts turn, they confirm this
for me at once.-But might I not be shaken if things such as I
don't dream of at present were to happen?
422. SOI am trying to say something that sounds like pragmatism.
Here I am being thwarted by a kind of Weltanscba~ting.
423. Then why don't I simply say with Moore '? h o w that I
am in England" ? Saying this is meaningful in partic~h~r
cbrc~mstattces, which I can imagine. But when I utter the sentence outside
these circumstances, as an example to shew that I can know
truths of this kind with certainty, then it at once strikes me as
fishy.--Oughtit to ?
424. I say "1 know p" either to assure people that I, too,
know the truth p, or simply as an emphasis of kp. One says,
424

j4=

too, "I don't believe it, I h o w it". And one might also put it like
this (for example): "That is a tree. And that's not just surmise."
But what about this: "If I were to tell someone that that was
a tree, that wouldn't be just surmise." Isn't this what Moore was
trying to say?
421. It would not be surmise and I might tell it to someone else
with complete certainty, as something there is no doubt about.
But does that mean that it is unconditionally the truth? May not
the thing that I recognize with complete certainty as the tree
that I have seen here my whole life long-may this not be disclosed as something different? May it not confound me?
And nevertheless it was right, in the circumstances that give
this sentence'meaning, to say "I know (I do not merely surmise)
that that's a tree". To say that in strict truth I only believe it,
would be wrong. It would be completely misleading to say: "I
believe my name is L. W." And this too is right: I cannot be
making a mistake about it. But that does not mean that I am
infallible about it.
426. But how can we show someone that we know truths, not
only about sense-data busrso about things ? For after all it can't
be enough for someone to assure us that he knows this.
Well, what must our starting point be if we are to shew this?
22.3.

427. We need to shew that even if he never uses the words "I

know

. . .", his conduct exhibits the thing we are concerned with.

428. For suppose a person of normal behaviour assured us that
he only believed his name was such-and-such, he believed he recognized the people he regularly lived with, he believed that he had
hands and feet when he didn't actually see them, and so on. Can
we shew him it is not so from the things he does (and says)?
23-3.5 I
429. What reason have I, now, when I cannot see my toes, to
assume that I have five toes on each foot?

Is it right to say that my reason is that previous experience has
always taught me so? Am I more certain of previous experience
than that I have ten toes?
That previous experience may very well be the came of my
present certitude; but is it its ground?
430. I meet someone from Mars and he asks me "How many
toes have human beings got ?"-I say "Ten. I'll shew you", and
take my shoes off. Suppose he was surprised that I knew with
such certainty, although I hadn't looked at my toes--ought I to
say: "We humans know how many toes we have whether we can
see them or not"?
26.3.5 I

43 I * "I knAw that this room is on the second floor, that behind
the door a shoa landing leads to the stairs, and so on." One
could imagine cases where I should come out with this, but they
would be extremely rare. But on the other hand I shew this
knowledge day in, day out by my actions and also in w m I say.
Now what does someone else gather from these actions and
words of mine? Won't it be just that I am sure of my ground?From the fact that I have been living here for many weeks and
have gone up and down the stairs every day he will gather that I
know where my room is situated.-I shall give him the assurance
"I know" when he does not already know things which would
have compelled the conclusion that I knew.

.. ."

43 2. The utterance "I know
can only have its meaning in
connection with the other evidence of my 'knowing'.
433. So if I say to someone "I know that that's a tree", it is as if
I told him "that is a tree; you can absolutely rely on it; there is no
doubt about it". And a philosopher could only use the statement
to show that this form of speech is actually used. But if his use
of it is not to be merely an observation about English grammar,
he must give the circumstances in which this expression functions.

434. Now does experience teach us that in such-and-such circumstances people know this and that? Certainly, experience shews
us that normally after so-and-so many days a man can find his
way about a house he has been living in. Or even: experience

teaches us that after such-and-such a period of training a man's
judgment is to be trusted. He must, experience tells us, have
learnt for so long in order to be able to make a correct prediction.
But--27.3435. One is often bewitched by a word. For example, by the
word cckn~wyy.
436. Is God bound by our knowledge? Are a lot of our statements incapable of falsehood? For that is what we want to say.
437. I am inclined to say: "That cannot be false." That is interest-

ing; but what consequences has it?

438. It would not be enough to assure someone that I know
what is going on at a certain place-without giving him grounds
that satisfy him that I am in a position to know.
439. Even the statement '1 know that behind this door there is
a landing and the stairway down to the ground floor" only sounds
so convincing because everyone takes it for granted that I know
it.
440. There is something universal here; not just something
personal.

. . ."

41.In a ccylrt of law the mere assurance "I know
on the
part of a witness would convince no one. It must be shown that
he was in a position to know.
Even the assurance "I know that that's a hand", said while
someone looked at his own hand, would not be credible unless
we knew the circumstances in which it was said. And if we do
know them, it seems to be an assurance that the person speaking
is normal in this respect.

442. For may it not happen that I imagine myself to h o w something ?
443. Sup ose that in a certain language there were no word
people simply make ascorrespon ng to our "know".-The
sertions. ("That is a tree", etc.) Naturally it can occur for them
to make mistakes. And so they attach a sign to the sentence which
indicates how probable they take a mistake to be-or should I
say, how probable a mistake is in this case? This latter can also

8

be indicated by mentioning certain circumstances. For example
"Then A said to B '. .'. I was standing quite close to them and
my hearing is good", or "A was at such-and-such a place yesterday. I saw him from a long way off. My eyes are not very good",
or "There is a tree over there: I can see it clearly and I have seen
it innumerable times before".

.

444. "The train leaves at two o'clock. Check it once more to
make certain" or "The train leaves at two o'clock. I have just
looked it up in a new time-table". One may also add "I am
reliable in such matters". The usefulness of such additions is
obvious,
445. But if I say "I have two hands", what can I add to indicate
reliability? At the most that the circumstances are the ordinary
ones.
441. But why am I so certain that this is my hand? Doesn't the
whole language-game rest on this kind of certainty?
Or: isn't this 'certainty' already presupposed in the languagegame? Namely by virtue of the fact that one is not playing the
game, or is playing it wrong, if one does not recognize objects with
certainty.
447. Compare with this I 2 x I 2 = 144. Here too we don't say
"perhaps". For, in so far as this proposition rests on our not miscounting or miscalculating and on our senses not deceiving us as
we calculate, both propositions, the arithmetical one and the
physical one, are on the same level.
I want to say: The physical game is just as certain as the arithmetical. But this can be misunderstood. My remark is a logical
and not a psychological one.
448. I want to say: If one doesn't marvel at the fact that the
propositions of arithmetic (e.g. the multiplication tables) are
'absolutely certain', then why should one be astonished that the
proposition "This is my hand" is so equally?
449. Something must be taught us as a foundation.
410. I want to say: our learning has the form "that is a violet",
"that is a table". Admittedly, the child might hear the word
"violet" for the first time in the sentence "perhaps that is a

violet", but then he could ask "what is a violet?" Now this
might of course be answered by showing him a picture. But how
would it be if one said "that is a
only when showing him a
9
picture, but otherwise said nothing but "perhaps that is a
What practical consequences is that supposed to have ?
A doubt that doubted everything would not be a doubt.

. . ."

. ..

3

45 1. My objection against Moore, that the meaning of the
isolated sentence "That is a tree" is undetermined, since it is not
determined what the "that" is that is said to be a tree-doesn't
work, for one can make the meaning more definite by saying, for
example: "The object over there that looks like a tree is not an
artificial imitation of a tree but a real one."
452. It would not be reasonable to doubt if that was a real tree
or only. .
My finding it beyond doubt is not what counts. If a doubt
would be unreasonable, that cannot be seen from what I hold.
There would therefore have to be a rule that declares doubt to
be unreasonable here. But there isn't such a rule, either.

..

45 3. I do indeed say: "Here no reasonable person would doubt."
-Could we imagine learned judges being asked whether a doubt
was reasonable or unreasonable ?
454. There are cases where doubt is unreasonable, but others
where it seems logically impossible. And there seems to be no
clear boundary between them.
29-3
45 1. Every languagagame is based on words 'and objects' being
recognized again. We learn with the same inexorability that this
is a chair as that 2 x 2 = 4.
456. If, therefore, I doubt or am uncertain about this being my
hand (in whatever sense), why not in that case about the meaning
of these words as well ?
457. Do I want to say, then, that certainty resides in the nature
of the language-game ?

458. One doubts on specific grounds. The question is this:
how is doubt introduced into the language-game ?
459. If the shopkeeper wanted to investigate each of his apples
without anv reason, for the sake of beine certain about evervthing, why hoesn9tLe have to investigate ;he investigation ? id
can one talk of belief here (I mean belief as in 'relidous belief',
not surmise) ? All psychological terms merely dis&act us from
the thing that really matters.

460. I go to the doctor, shew him my hand and say "This is a
hand, not .; I've injured it, etc., etc." Am I only giving him a
piece of superfluous information? For example, mightn't one
say: supposing the words "This is a hand" w e a piece of information-how could you bank on his understanding this information ?
Indeed, if it is open to doubt 'whether that is ;hand9, why isn't it
also open to doubt whether I am a human being who is informing
the doctor of this?-But on the other hand one can imagine
cases-even if thev are verv rare ones-where this declaration is
not superfluous, & is only~uperfluousbut not absurd.

..

461. Suppose that I were the doctor and a patient came to me,
showed me his hand and said: "This thing that looks like a hand
isn't just a superb imitation-it really is a hand" and went on to
talk about his injury-should I really take this as a piece of
information, even though a superfluous one? Shouldn't I be
more likely to consider it nonsense, which admittedly did have
the form of a piece of information? For, I should say, if this
information really were meaningful, how can he be certain of
what he says ? The background is lacking for it to be information.

462. Why doesn't Moore produce as one of the things that he
knows, for example, that in such-and-such a part of England there
is a village called so-and-so? In other words: why doesn't he
mention a fact that is known to him and not to every one of us?
3 1.3

463. This is certainly true, that the information "That is a tree",
when no one could doubt it, might be a kind of joke and as such
Goe

have meaning. A joke of this kind was in fact made once by
Renan.
3*4*SI
464. My difliculty can also be shewn like this: I am sitting
talking to a friend. Suddenly I say: "I knew all along that you
were so-and-so." Is that really just a superfluous, though true,
remark?
I feel as if these words were like "Good morning" said to
someone in the middle of a conversation.
461. How would it be if we had the words "They know nowadays that there are over
species of insects" instead of "I
know that that's a tree"? If someone were suddenly to utter the
first sentence out of all context one might think: he has been
thinking of something else in the interim and is now saying out
loud some sentence in his train of thought. Or again: he is in a
trance and is speaking without understanding what he is saying.

...

466. Thus it seems to me that I have known something the
whole time, and yet there is no meaning in saying so, in uttering
this truth.
467. I am sitting with a. philosopher in the garden; he says again
and again "I know that that's a tree", pointing. to a tree that is
near US. Someone else arrives and hears thi; and I tell him:
"This fellow isn't insane. We are only doing plhlosophy."
4.4.
468. Someone says irrelevantly "That's a tree". He might say
this sentence because he remembers having heard it in a similar
situation; or he was suddenly struck by the tree's .beauty and the
sentence was an exclamation; or he was pronouncing the sentence
to himself as a grammatical example; etc., etc. And now I ask
him "How did you mean that?" and he replies "It was a piece of
information directed at you". Shouldn't I be at liberty to assume
that he doesn't know what he is saying, if he is insane enough to
want to give me this information?

469. In the middle of a conversation, someone says to me out
of the blue: "I wish you luck." I am astonished; but later I

realize that these words connect up with his thoughts about me.
And now they do not strike me as meaningless any more.
470. Why is there no doubt that I am called L. W. ? I t does not
seem at all like something that one could establish at once beyond
doubt. One would not think that it is one of the indubitable
truths.
[Here there is still a big gap in my thinking. And I doubt whether
it will be filled now.]
471. It is so difficult to find the begdnfting. Or, better: it is difficult
to begin at the beginning. And not try to go further back.
472. When a child learns language it learns at the same time
what is to be investigated and what not. When it learns that there
is a cupboard in the room, it isn't taught to doubt whether what
it sees later on is still a cupboard or only a kind of stage set.
473. Just as in writing we learn a particular basic form of letters

and then vary it later, so we learn first the stability of things as
the norm, which is then subject to alterations.
474. This game proves its worth. That may be the cause of its
being played, but it is not the ground.
475. I want to regard man here as an animal; as a primitive
being to which one grants instinct but not ratiocination. As a
creature in a primitive state. Any logic good enough for a
primitive means of communication needs no apology from us.
Language did not emerge from some kind of ratiocination.
6.4.
476. Children do not learn that books exist, that armchairs
exist, etc. etc.,-they learn to fetch books, sit in armchairs, etc.
etc.
Later, questions about the existence of things do of course
arise. "Is there such a thing as a unicorn?" and so on. But such a
question is possible only because as a rule no corresponding
question presents itself. For how does one know how to set

about satisfying oneself of the existence of unicorns 7 How did
one learn the method for determining whether something exists
or not?
"So one must know that the objects whose names one
teaches a child by an ostensive definition exist."-Why must one
know they do ? Isn't it enough that experience doesn't later show
the opposite 7
For why should the language-game rest on some kind of
knowledge ?
477.

7.4.
478.

Does a child believe that milk exists ? Or does it know that
milk exists ? Does a cat know that a mouse exists?
Are we to say that the knowledge that there are physical
objects comes very early or very late?

479.

480. A child that is learning to use the word "tree". One stands
with it in front of a tree and says ''Love4 tree!" Clearly no
doubt as to the tree's existence comes into the language-game.
But can the child be said to h o w : 'that a tree exists'? Admittedly
it's true that 'knowing something' doesn't involve thinking
about it-but mustn't anyone who knows something be capable
of doubt ? And doubting means thinking.

When one hears Moore say ''I h o w that that's a tree", one
suddenly understands those who think that that has by no means
been settled.
The matter strikes one all at once as being unclear and blurred.
It is as if Moore had put it in the wrong light.
It is as if I were to see a painting (say a painted stage-set) and
recognize what it represents from a long way off at once and
without the slightest doubt. But now I step nearer: and then I see
a lot of patches of different colours, which are all highly ambiguous
and do not provide any certainty whatever.
48 I.

48 2.

It is as if "I know" did not tolerate a metaphysical emphasis.

The correct use of the expression "I know". Someone with
bd sight asks me: "do you believe that the thing we can see there
is a tree ?" I reply "I h o w it is; I can see it clearly and am familiar
48 3.

with it".-A:
"Is N. N. at home?"-I:
"I believe he is.'?--A:
"Was he at home yesterday ?'?--I: "Yesterday he was-I know
"Do you know or only believe that
he was; I spoke to him."-A:
this part of the house is built on later than the rest?"-I:
"I
b o w it is; I asked so and so about it."
484. In these cases, then, one says "I know" and mentions how
one knows, or at least one can do so.
485. We can also imagine a case where someone goes through a
list of propositions and as he does so keeps asking "Do I know
that or do I only believe it?" He wants to check the certainty of
each individual proposition. It might be a question of making a
statement as a witness before a court.
9.4486. "Do you know or do you only believe that your name is
L. W. ?" Is that a meaningful question ?
Do you know or do you only believe that what you are writing
down now are German words ? Do you only believe that "believe"
has this meaning ? W h meaning ?
487. What is the proof that 1 know something? Most certainly
not my saying I know it.
488. And so, when writers enumerate all the things they know,
that proves nothing whatever.
So the possibility of knowledge about physical objects cannot
be proved by the protestations of those who believe that they
have such knowledge.
489. For what reply does one make to someone who says "I
believe it merely strikes you as if you knew it"?
490. When I ask "Do I know or do I only believe that I am

..

called . ?" it is no use to look within myself.
But I could say: not only do I never have the slightest doubt
that I am called that, but there is no judgment I could be certain
of if I started doubting about that.

10.4.
491. "DO I know or do I only believe that I am called L. W. ?"
-Of course, if the question were "Am I certain or do I only
?", then my answer could be relied on.
surmise

. ..

.

492. "DO I know or do I only believe . . ?" might also be
expressed like this: What if it seemed to turn out that what until
now has seemed immune to doubt was a false assumption?
Would I react as I do when a belief has proved to be false? or
would it seem to knock from under my feet the ground on which
I stand in making any judgments at all?-But of course I do not
intend this as a prophecy.
Would I simply say "I should never have thought it!"--or
would I (have to) refuse to revise my judgment-because such a
'revision' would amount to annihilation of all yardsticks ?
493. So is this it: I must recognize certain authorities in order
to make judgments at all?
494. "I cannot doubt this proposition without giving up all
judgment."
But what sort of proposition is that? (It is reminiscent of what
Frege said about the law of identity.') It is certainly no empirical
proposition. It does not belong to psychology. It has rather the
character of a rule.
495. One might simply say "0, rubbish!" to someone who
wanted to make objections to the propositions that are beyond
doubt. That is, not reply to him but admonish him.
496. This is a similar case to that of shewing that it has no
meaning to say that a game has always been played wrong.
497. If someone wanted to arouse doubts in me and spoke like
this: here your memory is deceiving you, there you've been taken
in, there again you have not been thorough enough in satisfying
yourself, etc., and if I did not allow myself to be shaken but kept
to my certainty-then my doing so cannot be wrong, even if o d y
because this is just what defines a game.
498. The queer thing is that even though I find it quite correct
for someone to say "Rubbish!" and so brush aside the attempt to
confuse him with'doubts at bedrock-nevertheless, I hold% to
be incorrect if he seeks to defend himself (using, e.g., the words
('1know").
GrMdge~ekeder Arifbmstik I xviii E&

499. I might also put it like this: the 'law of induction' can no
more be grounded than certain particular propositions concerning
the material of experience.
But it would also strike me as nonsense to say "I know that
the law of induction is true".
Imagine such a statement made in a court of law! It would be
where 'believe'
more correct to say "I believe in the law o f .
has nothing to do with surmising.
5 00.

. ."

Am I not getting closer and closer to saying that in the end
logic cannot be described? You must look at the practice of
l a b a g e , then you will see it.
501.

J.

Could one say "I know the position of my hands with my
eyes closed", if the position I gave always or mostly contradicted
the evidence of other people?
502.

103. I look at an object and say "That is a tree", or "1 know
that that's a treem.-Now if I go nearer and it turns out that it
isn't, I may say "It wasn't a tree after all" or alternatively I say
"It tvas a tree but now it isn't any longer". But if all the others
contradicted me, and said it never had been a tree, and if all the
other evidences spoke against me-what good would it do me to
stick to my '? know"?

jo4. Whether I know something depends on whether the evidence backs me up or contradicts me. For to say one knows one
has a pain means nothing.
5 oy

.

It is always by favour of Nature that one knows something.

job. "If my memory deceives me here it can deceive me everywhere."
If I don't know tbutf, how do I know if my words mean what
I believe they mean ?
5 07.

"If this deceives me, what does 'deceive' mean any more?"

j 08.

What can I rely on ?

log. I really want to say that a language-game is only possible
if one trusts something (I did not say "can trust something").

If I say "Of course I know that that's a towel" I am making
an utterance.' I have no thought of a verification. For me it is an
immediate utterance.
I don't think of past or future. (And of course it's the same for
Moore, too.)
It is just like directly taking hold of something, as I take hold
of my towel without having doubts.
j 10.

And yet this direct taking-hold corresponds to a sureness,
not to a knowing.
But don't I take hold of a thing's name like that, too?
j I I.

I 2.4.

Isn't the question this: "What if you had to change your
opinion even on these most fundamental things?" And to that
the answer seems to me to be: "You don't have to change it.
That is just what their being 'fundamental' is."
5 I 2.

What if something real8 unheard-of happened ?-If I, say,
saw houses gradually turning into steam without any obvious
cause, if the cattle in the fields stood on their heads and laughed
and spoke comprehensible words; if trees gradually changed into
men and men into trees. Now, was I right when I said before all
these things happened "I know that that's a house" etc., or
simply "that's a house" etc. ?
j I 3.

14. This statement appeared to me fundamental; if it is false,

what are 'true' or 'false' any more?!

.

If my name is not L. W., how can I rely on what is meant
by "true" and "false"?
5I

5 IG. If something happened (such as someone telling me some-

thing) calculated to make me doubtful of my own name, there
would certainly also be something that made the grounds of these
doubts themselves seem doubtful, and I could therefore decide
to retain my old belief.
5 17. But might it not be possible for something to happen that

threw me entirelv off the rails? Evidence that made the most
certain thing unacceptable to me ? Or at any rate made me throw
l

A~Jerung.(Eds.)

over my most fundamental judgments? (Whether rightly or

wrongly is beside the point.)
1'8

.

Could I imagine observing this in another person?

j ~ g . Admittedly, if you are obeying the order "Bring me a
book", you may have to check whether the thing you see over
there really is a book, but then you do at least know what people
mean by "book"; and if you don't you can look it up,-but then
you must know what some other word means. And the fact that
a word means such-and-such, is bsed in such-and-such a way, is
in turn an empirical fact, like the fact that what you see over there
is a book.
Therefore, in order for you to be able to carry out an order
there must be some empirical fact about which you are not in
doubt. Doubt itself rests only on what is beyond doubt.
But since a language-game is something that consists in the recurrent procedures of the game in time, it seems impossible to say
in any individt/uZ case that such-and-such must be beyond doubt
if there is to be a language-game-though it is right enough to
say that U J a rt/h some empirical judgment or other must be
beyond doubt.
1 3 *4*

Moore has every right to say he knows there's a tree there
in front of him. Naturally he may be wrong. (For it is not the
same as with the utterance "I believe there is a tree there".) But
whether he is right or wrong in this case is of no philosophical
importance. If Moore is attacking those who say that one cannot
really know such a thing, he can't do it by assuring them that he
knows this and that. For one need not believe him. If his opponents had asserted that one could not believe this and that, then
he could have replied: "I believe it."
5 20.

=4-40

Moore's mistake lies in this-countering the assertion that
one cannot know that, by saying "I do know it".
12 I.

We say: if a child has mastered languageand hence its
application-it must know the meaning of words. It must, for
2

5 22

.

68e

example, be able to attach the name of its colour to a white, black,
red or blue object without the occurrence of any doubt.
And indeed no one misses doubt here; no one is surprised
that we do not merely surmise the meaning of our words.
523.

124. Is it essential for our language-games ('ordering and

obeying' for example) that no doubt appears at certain points, or
is it enough if there is the feeling of being sure, admittedly with
a slight breath of doubt?
That is, is it enough if I do not, as I do now, call something
'black', 'green', 'red', straight off, without any doubt at all interposing itself-but do instead say "I am sure that that is red", as
one may say "I am sure that he will come today" (in other words
with the 'feeling of being sure')?
The accompanying feeling is of course a matter of indifference
to us, and equally we have no need to bother about the words
"I am sure that" either.-What is important is whether they go
with a difference in the practice of thelanguage.
One might ask whether a person who spoke like this would
always say "I am sure" on occasions where (for example) there
is sureness in the reports we make (in an experiment, for example,
we look through a tube and report the colour we see through it).
If he does, our immediate inclination will be to check what he says.
But if he proves to be perfectly reliable, one will say that his way
of talking is merely a bit perverse, and does not affect the issue.
One might for example suppose that he has read sceptical philosophers, become-convinced that one can know nothing, and that
is why he has adopted this way of speaking. Once we are used to
it, it does not infect practice.
u

What, then, does the case look like where someone really
has got a different relationship to the names of colours, for
example, from us? Where, that is, there persists a slight doubt
or a possibility of doubt in their use.
525.

I 6.4.

5 26.

If someone were to look at an English pillar-box and say
"I am sure that it's red", we should have to suppose that he was

colour-blind, or believe he had no mastery of English and knew
the correct name for the colour in some other language.
If neither was the case we should not quite understand him.
527. An Englishman who calls this colout "red" is not: 'sure
it is called "red" in English'.
A child who has mastered the use of the word is not 'sure that
in his language this colour is called .'. Nor can one say of him
that when he is learning to speak he learns that the colour is
called that in English; nor yet: he knows this when he has learnt
the use of the word.

..

5 28. And in spite of this: if someone asked me what the colour
was called in German and I tell him, and now he asks me "are
you sure?"-then I shall reply "I h o w it is; German is my mother
tongue"*
5 29. And one child, for example, will say, of another or of

himself, that he already knows what such-and-such is called.

I may tell someone "this colour is called 'red' in English"
(when for example I am teaching him English). In this case I
should not say "I h o w that this colour . ."-I would perhaps
say that if I had just now learned it, or by contrast with another
colour whose English name I am not acquainted with.
j 30.

.

But now, isn't it correct to describe my present state as
follows: I h o w what this colour is called in English? And if
that is correct, why then should I not describe mystate with the
corresponding words "I know etc." ?
5 3 I.

So when Moore sat in front of a tree and said "I know
that that's a tree", he was simply sating the truth about his state
at the time.
[I do philosophy now like an old woman who is always mislaying something and having to look for it again: now her
spectacles, now her keys.]
5 32.

Well, if it was correct to describe his state out of context,
then it was just as correct to utter the words "that's a tree" out
of context.
5 3 3.

534. But is it wrong to say: "A child that has mastered a
language-game must h o w certain things" ?
If instead of that one said "must be able to do certain things",
that would be a pleonasm, yet this is just what I want to counter
"a child acquires a knowledge
the first sentence with.-But:
of natural history". That presupposes that it can ask what
such and such a plant is called.
5 3 5. The child knows what something is called if he can reply
cortectly to the question "what is that called ?"
5 6 . Naturally, the child who is just learning to speak has not
yet got the concept iJ culled at all.
j 37.

Can one say of someone who hasn't this concept that he
how$ what such-and-such is called?
The child, I should like to say, learns to react in such-andsuch a way; and in so reacting it doesn't so far know anything.
Knowing only begins at a later level.
538.

5 39. Does it go for knowing as it does for collecting?

540. A dog might learn to run to N at the call ccN", and to M
at the call "M",-but
would that mean he knows what these
people are called ?
541. "He only knows what this person is called-not yet what
that person is called". That is something one cannot, strictly
speaking, say of someone who simply has not yet got the
concept of people's having names.
142. "I can't describe this flower if I don't know that this
colour is called 'red'."
543. A child can use the names of people long before he can
say in any form whatever: "I know this one's name; I don't
know that one's yet."
544. Of course I may truthfully say "I know what this colour
is called in English", at the same time as I point (for example) to
the colour of fresh blood. But - - 141. 'A child knows which colour is meant by the word
"blue".' What he knows here is not all that simple.

546. I should say "I know what this colour is called" if e.g.
what is in question is shades of colour whose name not everybody knows.
547. One can't yet say to a child who is just beginning to speak
and can use the words "red" and "blue": "Come on, you know
what this colour is called!"
548. A child must learn the use of colour words before it can
ask for the name of a colour.
549. It would be wrong to say that I can only say "I know that
there is a chair there" when there is a chair there. Of course it
isn't true unless there is, but I have a right to say this if I am
m there is a chair there, even if I am wrong.
[Pretensions are a mortgage which burdens a philosopher's
capacity to think.]

5 lo. If someone believes something, we needn't always be able

to answer the question 'why he believes it'; but if he knows something,. then th; question
"how does he know?" must be capable
.
ot belng answered.
m .

5 5 I. And if one does answer this question, one must do so

according to generally accepted axioms. This is how something
of this sort may be known.
Do I know that I am now sitting in a chair?-Don't I
h o w it?! In the present circumstances no one is going to say
that I know this; but no more will he say, for example, that I am
conscious. Nor will one normally say this of the passers-by in
the street.
But now, even if one doesn't say it, does that make it untrue??
j 52.

553. It is queer: if I say,, without any special occasion, "I
know2'-for example, "I know that I am now sitting in a chair",
this statement seems to me unjustified and presumptuous. But if
I make the same statement when there is some need for it, then,
although I am not a jot more certain of its truth, it seems to me
to be perfectly justified and everyday.

54. In its language-game it is not presumptuous. There, it has
no higher position than, simply, the human language-game. For
there it has its restricted application.
But as soon as I say this sentence outside its context, it appears
in a false light. For then it is as if I wanted to insist that there are
things that I h o w . God himself can't say anything to me about
them.
j

We say we know that water boils when it is put over a fire.
How do we know? Experience has taught us.-I say "I know
that I had breakfast this morning"; experience hasn't taught me
that. One also says "I know that he is in pain". The languagegame is different every time, we are sure every time, and people
will agree with us that we are in a positiotf to know every time.
And that is why the propositions of physics are found in textbooks for everyone.
If someone says he knows something, it must be something that,
by general consent, he is in a position to know.
5 55.

5 5 6. One doesn't say: he is in a position to believe that.

But one does say: "It is reasonable to assume that in this situation" (or "to believe that").
5 57.

A court-martial may well have to decide whether it was

reasonable in such-and-such a situation to have assumed this or
that with confidence (even though wrongly).

5
We say we know that water boils and does not freeze
under such-and-such circumstances. Is it conceivable that we are
wrong ? Wouldn't a mistake topple all judgment with it ? More:
what could stand if that were to fall? Might someone discover
something that made us say "It was a mistake"?
Whatever may happen in the future, however water may
behave in the future,-we know that up to now it has behaved
thtls in innumerable instances.
This fact is fused into the foundations of our language-game.

5 59. You must bear in mind that the language-game is so to
say something unpredictable. I mean: it is not based on grounds.
It is not reasonable (or unreasonable).
It is there-like oux life.

5 60. And the concept of knowing is coupled with that of the
language-game.
5 61. "I know" and "You can rely on it". But one cannot always
substitute the latter for the former.
5 62. At any rate it is important to imagine a language in
which ow concept 'knowledge' does not exist.

One says "I know that he is in pain" although one can
produce no convincing grounds for this.-Is this the same as "I
am sure that he ."?-No.
"I am sure" tells you mv subjective
certainty. "I know" means that I who know it, and the person
who doesn't are separated by a difference in understanding.
(Perhaps based on a difference in degree of experience.)
If I say "I know" in mathematics, then the justification for this
is a proof.
j 63.

..

If in these two cases instead of "I know", one says "you can
rely on it" then the substantiation is of a different kind in each
case.
And substantiation comes to an end.
5 64.

A language-game: bringing building stones, reporting the
number of available stones. The number is sometimes estimated,
sometimes established by counting. Then the question arises
"Do you believe there are as many stones as that ?", and the answer
"I know there are-I've just counted them". But here the "I
know" could be dropped. If, however, there are several ways of
finding something out for sure, like counting, weighing, measuring the stack, then the statement "I know" can take the place
of mentioning bow I know.
165. But here there isn't yet any question of any 'knowledge'
that tbis is called "a slab", thir "a pillar", etc.
566. Nor does a child who learns my language-game (No. 2)'
learn to say "I know that this is called 'a slab'
Now of course there is a language-game in which the child
uses that sentence. This presupposes that the child is already
capable of using the name as soon as he is given it. (As if someone
were to tell me "this colour is called . .".)-Thus,
if the child

".

.

Philosophical ~nuesdgafiions$2. Eds.

has learnt a language-game with building stones, one can say
something like "and this stone is called '. .' ", and in this way
the original language-game has been expanded.

.

567. And now, is my knowledge that I am called L. W. of the
same kind as knowledge that water boils at looOC. ? Of course,
this question is wrongly put.

If one of my names were used only very rarely, then it
might happen that I did not know it. It goes without saying that
I know my name, only because, like anyone else, I use it over and
over again.
j 68.

5 69. An inner experience cannot shew me that I know something.

.. .

79
Hence, if in spite of that I say, "I know that my name is
,
and yet it is obviously not an empirical proposition, - - -

j70. "Iknow this is my name; among us any grown-up knows
what his name is."

..

"My name is .-you can rely on that. If it turns out to
be wrong you need never believe me in the future."
J 7 I.

572. Don't I seem to know that I can't be wrong about such a
thing as my own name?
This comes out in the words: "If that is wrong, then I
am crazy." Very well, but those are words; but what influence
has it on the application of language?
573. Is it through the impossibility of anything's convincing
me of the contrary?
574. The question is, what kind of proposition is: "I know I
can't be mistaken about that", or again
"I can't be mistaken
about that" ?
This "I know" seems to prescind from all grounds: I simply
h o w it. But if there can be any question at all of being mistaken
here, then it must be possible to test whether I know it.
175. Thus the purpose of the phrase "I know" might be to
indicate where I can be relied on; but where that's what it's
doing, the usefulness of this sign must emerge from experience.

576. One might say "How do I know that I'm not mistaken
about my name?"-and if the reply was "Because I have used it
so often", one might go on to ask "How do I know that I am
not mistaken about that?" And here the "How do I know"
cannot any longer have any significance.
577. "My knowledge of my name is absolutely definite."
I would refuse to entertain any argument that tried to show
the opposite!
And what does "I wovould refuse" mean? Is it the expression of
an intention?
578. But mightn't a higher authority assure me that I don't
know the truth? So that I had to say "Teach me!"? But then my
eyes would have to be opened.
579. It is part of the language-game with people's names that
everyone knows his name with the greatest certainty.

It might surely happen that whenever I said "I know" it
turned out to be wrong. (Shewing up.)
j80.

5 8 I. But perhaps I might nevertheless be unable to help myself,
so that I kept on declaring "I know
But ask yourself:
how did the child learn the expression?

. . .".

"I know that" may mean: I am quite familiar with it--or
again: it is certainly so.
5 82.

. . . is .. . H o w do
you.know?-"I have learnt. . . .
Could 1 substitute "In . . . the name of this is '. . .' " for "I
183. "I know that the name of this in

6

2 99

72

know etc." in this example?

584. Would it be possible to make use of the verb "know"
only in the question "How do you know?" following a simple
assertion?-Instead of "I already know that" one says "I am
familiar with that"; and this follows only upon being told the fact.
~ u t what
'
does one say instead of "I know what that is"?
5 85. But doesn't "I know that that's a tree" say something

different from "that is a tree"?
Tbe l d fentmce is a later addition. (Eds.)

Instead of "I know what that is" one might say "I can say
what that is7'. And if one adopted this form of expression what
would then become of "I know that that is a ."?
j 86.

..

. ..

9>

587. Back to the question whether "I know that that's a
says anything different from "that is a .". In the first sentence
a person is mentioned, in the second, not. But that does not shew
that they have different meanings. A; all events one often replaces
the first form by the second, and then often gives the latter a
special intonation. For one speaks differently when one makes an
uncontradicted assertion from when one maintains an assertion
in face of contradiction.

..

. ."

But don't I use the words "I know that ,
to say that I
am in a certain state, whereas the mere assertion "that is a . 2
does not say this? And yet one often does reply to such an
c
assertion by asking "how do you know.<
But surely, only
because the fact that I assert this gives to understand that I think
I know it".-This
point could be made in the following way:
In a zoo there might be a notice "this is a zebra"; but never "I
know that this is a zebra".
"I know" has meaning only when it is uttered by a person.
But, given that, it is a matter of indifference whether what is
?9
uttered is "I know
or "That is
g88.

. . ."

..

9

.. . .

j89. For how does a man learn to recognize his own state of
knowing something ?
90. At most one might speak of recognizing a state, where what
is said is "I know what that is". Here one can satisfy oneself that
one really is in possession of this knowledge.
5 91. "I know what kind of tree that is.-It is a chestnut."
"I know what kind of tree that is.-I know it's a chestnut."
The first statement sounds more natural than the second. One
will only say "I know" a second time if one wants especially to
emphasize certainty; perhaps to anticipate being contradicted.
The first "I know" means roughly: I can say.
But in another case one might begin with the observation
> and then, when this is contradicted, counter by
"that's a
saying: "I know what sort of a tree it is", and by this means lay
emphasis on being sure.

..."

192. "I can tell you what kind of a
about it."

. . . that is, and no doubt

. . ."

593. Even when one can replace "I know" by "It is
still
one cannot replace the negation of the one by the negation of the
other.
a new element enters our languageWith "I don't know
games.

. . ."

2 I .4.

594. My name is "L. W." And if someone were to dispute it, I
should straightaway make cornexions with innumerable things
which make it certain.
591. "But I can still imagine someone making all these connexions, and none of them corresponding with reality. Why
shouldn't I be in a similar case?"
If I imagine such a person I also imagine a reality, a world that
surrounds him; and I imagine him as thinking (and speaking) in
contradiction to this world.
596. If someone tells me his name is N. N., it is meaningful for
me to ask him "Can you be mistaken?" That is an allowable
question in the language-game. And the answer to it, yes or no,
makes sense.-Now of course this answer is not infallible either,
i.e., there might be a time when it proved to be wrong, but that
does not deprive the question "Can you be
and the answer
"Noy' of their meaning.

.. ."

197. The reply to the question "Can you be mistaken?" gives
the statement a definite weight. The answer may also be: "I don't
think so."
5 98. But couldn't one reply to the question "Can you

. ..', by

saying: "I will describe the case to you and then you can judge
for yourself whether I can be mistaken"?
For example, if it were a question of someone's own name, the
fact might be that he had never used this name, but remembered
he had read it on some document,-but on the other hand the
answer might be: "I've had this name my whole life long, I've
been called it by everybody." If that is not equivalent to the
answer "I can't be mistaken", then the latter has no meaning

whatever. And yet quite obviously it points to a very important
distinction.
199. For example one could describe the certainty of the proposi-

tion that water boils at circa roo0C.That isn't e.g. a proposition
I have once heard (like this or that, which I could mention). I made
the experiment myself at school. The proposition is a very elementary one in our text-books, which are to be trusted inmatters
like this because . .-Now one can offer counter-examples to all
this, which show that human beings have held this and that to be
certain which later, according to our opinion, proved false. But
the argument is w~rthless.~
To say: in the end we can only
adduce such grounds as we hold to be grounds, is to say nothing
at all.
I believe that at the bottom of this is a misunderstanding of the
nature of our language-games.

.

600. What kind of grounds have I for trusting text-books of
experimental physics ?
I have no grounds for not trusting them. And I trust them. I
know how such books are produced-or rather, I believe I know.
I have some evidence, but it does not go very far and is of a very
scattered kind. I have heard, seen and read various things.

Gor. There is always the danger of wanting to find an
expression's meaning by contemplating the expression itself, and
the frame of mind in which one uses it, instead of always thinking
of the practice. That is why one repeats the expression to oneself
so often, because it is as if one must see what one is looking for
in the expression and in the feeling it gives one.
23 -4.
,

Got. Should I say "I believe in physics", or "I know that
physics is true"?
60). I am taught that under sHch circumstances tbiJ happens. It
has been discovered by making the experiment a few times. Not
Marginal nofe. May it not also happen that we believe we recognize a mistake of
earlier times and later come to the conclusion that the first opinion was the right
one? etc.

that that would prove anything to us, if it weren't that this
experience was surrounded by others which combine with it to
form a system. Thus, people did not make experiments just about
falling bodies but also about air resistance and all sorts of other
things.
But in the end I rely on these experiences, or on the reports of
them, I feel no scruples about ordering my own activities in
accordance with them.-But hasn't this trust also proved itself?
So far as I can judge-yes.
604. In a court of law the statement of a physicist that water
boils at about roo0 C. would be accepted unconditionally as truth.
If I mistrusted this statement what could I do to undermine it?
Set up experiments myself? What would they prove ?

But what if the bhvsicist's statement were superstition
and it were just as absurd to go by it in reaching a verdict as to
rely on ordeal by fire ?
I

d

606. That to mv mind someone else has been wrong
is no
u
ground for assumkg that I am wrong now.-But isn't it a ground
for assuming that I might be wrong? It is no ground for any
Nnsweness in my judgment, or my actions.
607. A judge might even say "That is the truth-so far as a
human being can know it". But what would this rider achieve?
C'beyond alrreasonable doubt").
608. Is it wrong for me to be guided in my actions by the
propositions of physics? Am I to say I have no good ground for
doing so ? Isn't precisely this what we call a 'good ground' ?
609. Supposing we met people who did not regard that as a
telling reason. Now, how do we imagine this? Instead of the
phys6ist, they consuit an oracle. (And h r that we consider them
primitive.) Is it wrong for them to consult an oracle and be guided
by it ?-If we call this "wrong" aren't we using our languagegame as a base from which to combat theirs?

610. And are we right or wrong to combat it? Of course there
are all sorts of sloga& which willvbe used to support our proceedings.
611. Where two principles really do meet which cannot be
reconciled with one another, then each man declares the other a
fool and heretic.
612. I said I would 'combat' the other man,-but wouldn't I
give him reams? Certainly; but how far do they go ? At the end of
reasons comes persuasiofi. (Think what happens when missionaries
convert natives.)

.

If I now say "I know that the water in the kettle on the gasflame will not freeze but boil", I seem to be as justified in this "I
know" as I am in any. 'If I know anything I know thiJ'.-Or do
I know with still greater certainty that the person opposite me is
my old friend so-and-so? And how does that compare with the
proposition that I am seeing with two eyes and shall see them if I
look in the glass ?-I don't know confidently what I am to answer
here.-Rut still there is a difference between the cases. If the water
over the gas freezes, of course I shall be as astonished as can be,
but I shall assume some factor I don't know of, and perhaps leave
the matter to physicists to judge. But what could make me doubt
whether this person here is N. N., whom I have known for years ?
Here a doubt would seem to drag everything with it and plunge
it into chaos.

6I 3

614. That is to say: If I were contradicted on all sides and told
that this person's name was not what I had always known it was
(and I use "know" here intentionally), then in that case the
foundation of all judging would be taken away from me.
615 . Now does that mean: "I can only make judgments at all
because things behave thus and thus (as it were, behave
kindly)" ?
616. Why, would it be untbitlkabZe that I should stay in the
saddle however much the facts bucked ?

617. Certain events would put me into a position in which I
could not go on with the old language-game any further. In
which I was torn away from the sureness of the game.
Indeed, doesn't it seem obvious that the possibility of a
language-game is conditioned by certain facts ?

In that case it would seem as if the language-game must
'show' the facts that make it possible. (But that's not how it is.)
Then can one say that only a certain regularity in occurrences
makes induction possible? The 'possible' would of course have
to be 'ZogicuZb ssible'.
618.

619. Am I to say: even if an irregularity in natural events did
suddenly occur, that wouldn't have to throw me out of the saddle.
I might make inferences then just as before, but whether one
would call that "induction" is another question.
620. In particular circumstances one says "you can rely on this";
and this assurance may be justified or unjustified in everyday
language, and it may also count as justified even when what was
foretold does not occur. A Zunguag-game exists in which this
assurance is employed.
24-40

621. If anatomy were under discussion I should say: "I know
that twelve pairs of nerves lead from the brain." I have never
seen these nerves, and even a specialist will only have observed
them in a few specimens.-This just is how the word "know"
is correctly used here.
622. But now it is also correct to use "I know" in the contexts
which Moore mentioned, at least in p~rta'cuiur circumstances.
(Indeed, I do not know what "I know that I am a human being"
means. But even that might be given a sense.)
For each one of these sentences I can imagine circumstances
that turn it into a move in one of our language-games, and by
that it loses everything that is philosophically astonishing.
623. What is odd is that in such a case I always feel like saying
(although it is wrong): "I know that-so far as one can know
such a thing." That is incorrect, but something right is hidden
behind it.

"Can you be mistaken about this coloui's being called
'green' in English?" My answer to this can only be "No". If I
were to say "Yes, for there is always the possibility of a delusion",
that would mean nothing at all.
For is that rider something unknown to the other? And how
is it known to me?
624.

625. But does that mean that it is unthinkable that the word
"green" should have been produced here by a slip of the tongue
or a momentary confusion? Don't we know of such cases?One can also say to someone "Mightn't you perhaps have made
a slip?" That amounts to: ''Think about it again".-But these rules of caution only make sense if they come to an
end somewhere.
A doubt without an end is not even a doubt.
G26. Nor does it mean anything to say: "The English name of
this colour is certain& 'green',-unless,
of course, I am making a
slip of the tongue or am confused in some way."
627. Wouldn't one have to insert this clause into all languagegames ? (Which shows its senselessness.)
628. When we say "Certain propositions must be excluded
from doubt", it sounds as if I ought to put these propositionsfor example, that I am called L. W.-into a logic-book. For if it
belongs to the description of a language-game, it belongs to logic.
But that I am called L. W. does not belong to any such description. The language-game that operates with people's names can
certainly exist even if I am mistaken about my name,-but it
does presuppose that it is nonsensical to say that the majority of
people are mistaken about their names.
629. On the other hand, however, it is right to say of myself "I
cannot be mistaken about my name", and wrong if I say "perhaps
I am mistaken". But that doesn't mean that it is meaningless for
others to doubt what I declare to be certain.

630. Itis simply the normal case, to be incapable of mistake about
the designation of certain things in one's mother tongue.
631. "I can't be making a mistake about it" simply characterizes one kind of assertion.

t3z. Certain and uncertain memory. V certain memory tveve
not in general more reliable than uncertain memory, i.e., if it
were not confirmed by further verification more often than uncertain memory was, then the expression of certainty and uncertainty would not have its present function in language.
63 3. "I can't be making a mistake"--but what if I did make a
mistake then, after all? For isn't that possible? But does that
make the expression "I can't be etc." nonsense? Or would it be
better to say instead "I can hardly be mistaken"? No; for that
means something else.
634. "I can't be making a mistake; and if the worst comes to
the worst I shall make my proposition into a norm."
63 3.

"Ican't be making a mistake; I was with him today."

636. "I can't be making a mistake; but if after all something
should appear to speak against my proposition I shall stick to it,
despite this appearance."
637. "I can't etc." shows my assertion its place in the game. But
it relates essentially to me, not to the game in general.
If I am wrong in my assertion that doesn't detract from the
usefulness of th; language-game.
2 J *4#

638. "I can't be making a mistake" is an ordinary sentence,
which serves to give the certainty-value of a statement. And only
in its everyday use is it justiiied.
639. But what the devil use is it i f a s everyone admits-I may
be wrong about it, and therefore about the proposition it was
supposed to support too ?
640. Or shall I say: the sentence excludes a certain kind of
failure ?
641. "He told me about it today-I can't be making a mistake
about that."--But
what if it does turn out to be wrong?[Mustn't one make a distinction between the ways in which something 'turns out wrong2?-How can it be. shewn that my

statement was wrong? Here evidence is facing evidence, and it
must be dkcided which is to give way.
642. But suppose someone produced the scruple: what if I
suddenly as it were woke up and said "Just think, I've been imawell, who says that I don't wake
gining I was called L. W. I"
up once again and call tbis an extraordinary fancy, and so on?
643. Admittedly one can imagine a case-and cases do existwhere after the 'awakening' one never has any more doubt
which was imagination and which was reality. But such a case,
or its possibility, doesn't discredit the proposition "I can't be
wrong".
644. For otherwise, wouldn't all assertion be discredited in this
way ?

645. I can't be making a mistake,-but some day, rightly or
wrongly, I may think I realize that I was not competent to judge.
646. Admittedly, if that always or often happened it would
completely alter the character of the language-game.
647. There is a difference between a mistake for which, as it
were, a place is prepared in the game, and a complete irregularity
that happens as an exception.
648. I may also convince someone else that I 'can't be making a

mistake'.
I say to someone "So-and-so was with me this morning and
told me such-and-such". If this is astonishing he may ask me:
"You can't be mistaken about it?" That may mean: "Did that
really happen this morning?" or on the other hand: "Are you sure
you understood him properly?" It is easy to see what details I
should add to show that I was not wrong about the time, and
similarly to show that I hadn't misunderstood the story. But all
that can nod show that I haven't dreamed the whole thing, or
imagined it to myself in a dreamy way. Nor can it show that I
haven't perhaps made some sZ@ of $he dong= throughout. (That
sort of thing does happen.)

649. . (I
once said to someone-in English-that the shape of a
certaln branch was typical of the branch of an elm, which my
companion denied. Then we came past some ashes, and I said
"There, you see, here are the branches I was speaking about".
To which he replied "But that's an ash3'--and I said "I always
meant ash when I said elm".)
650. This surely means: the possibility of a mistake can be
eliminated in certain (numerous) cases.-And one does eliminate
mistakes in calculation in this way. For when a calculation has
been checked over and over again one cannot then say "Its
rightness is still only very probable-for an error may always still
have slipped in". For suppose it did seem for once as if an error
had been discovered-why shouldn't we suspect an error here?
61I. I cannot be making a mistake about I 2 x I 2 being 144.
And now one cannot contrast mathematical certainty with the
relative uncertainty of empirical propositions. For the mathematical proposition has been obtained by a series of actions that
are in no way different from the actions of the rest of our lives,
and are in the same degree liable to forgetfulness, oversight and
illusion.
652. Now can I prophesy that men will never throw over the
present arithmetical propositions, never say that now at last they
know how the matter stands? Yet would that justify a doubt on
our part?

.

65 3 ~f the proposition I 2 x I 2 = 144 is exempt from doubt,
then so too must non-mathematical propositions be.

26.4. j I
614. But against this there are plenty of objections.-In the first
place there is the fact that "I 2 x I 2 etc." is a mathematical proposition, and from this one may infer that only mathematical propositions are in this situation. And if this inference is not justified,
then there ought to be a proposition that is just as certain, and
deals with the process of this calculation, but isn't itself mathematical. I am &inking of such a proposition as: "The multiplication '12 x 12,when carried out by people who know how to
calculate, will in the great majority of cases give the result '144'

".

Nobody will contest this proposition, and naturally it is not a
mathematical one. But has it got the certainty of the mathematical proposition ?
The mathematical proposition has, as it were officially,
been given the stamp of incontestability. 1.e.: "Dispute about
other things; this is immovable-it is a hinge on which your
dispute can turn."
G j 1.

656. And one can not say that of the proposition that I am
called L. W. Nor of the proposition that such-and-such people
have calculated such-and-such a problem correctly.
657. The propositions of mathematics might be said to be
is not. But it too
fossilized.-The proposition "I am called .
is regarded as incontrovertible by those who, like myself, have overwhelming evidence for it. And this not out of thoughtlessness.
For, the evidence's being overwhelming consists precisely in the
fact that we do not need to give way before any contrary evidence.
And so we have here a buttress similar to the one that makes
the propositions of mathematics incontrovertible.

. ."

6 j 8. The question "But mightn't you be in the grip of a delusion
now and perhaps later find this out?"-might also be raised as
an objection to any proposition of the multiplication tables.
659. "I cannot be making a mistake about the fact that I have
just had lunch."
For if I say to someone "I have just eaten" he may believe that
I am lying or have momentarily lost my wits but he won't believe
that I am making a mistake. Indeed, the assumption
that I might
be making a mistake has no meaning here.
But that isn't true. I might, for example, have dropped off
immediately after the meal without knowing it and have slept
for an hour, and now believe I had just eaten.
But still, I distinguish here between different kinds of mistake.
660. I might ask: "How could I be making a mistake about my
name being L. W. ?" And I can say: I can't see how it would be
possible.

661. How might I be mistaken in my assumption that I was
never on the moon?

662. If I were to say "I have never been on the moon-but I
may be mistaken", that would be idiotic.
For even the thought that I might have been transported there,
by unknown means, in my sleep, would not give me any rigbt to
speak of a possible mistake here. I play the game wrong if I do.
663. I have a right to say "I can't be making a mistake about this"
even if I am in error.
664. It makes a difference: whether one is learning in school
what is right and wrong in mathematics, or whether I myself say
that I cannot be making a mistake in a proposition.
665. In the latter case I am adding something special to what is
generally laid down.
666. But how is it for example with anatomy (or a large part of
it)? Isn't what it describes, too, exempt from all doubt?
667. Even if I came to a country where they believed that people
were taken to the moon in dreams, I couldn't say to them: "I
have never been to the moon.-Of course I may be mistaken".
And to their question "Mayn't you be mistaken?" I should have
to answer: No.
668. What practical consequences has it if I give a piece of
information and add that I can't be making a mistake about it?
(I might also add instead: "I can no more be wrong about this
than about my name's being L. W.")
The other person might doubt my statement nonetheless. But
if he trusts me he will not only accept my information, he will
also draw definite conclusions from my conviction, as to how I
shall behave.
669. The sentence "I can't be making a mistake" is certainly
used in practice. But we may question whether it is then to be
taken in a perfectly rigorous sense, or is rather a kind of exaggeration which perhaps is used only with a view to persuasion.

27.4.
670. We might speak of fundamental principles of human
enquiry.
671. I fly from here to a part of the world where the people
have only indefinite information, or none at all, about the possibility of flying. I tell them I have just flown there from.
They
ask me if I might be mistaken.-They have obviously a false
impression of how the thing happens. (If I were packed up
in a box it would be possible for me to be mistaken about the
way I had travelled.) If I simply tell them that I can't be mistaken,
that won't perhaps convince them; but it will if I describe the
actual procedure to them. Then they will certainly not bring the
possibility of a mistake into the question. But for all that-even
if they trust me-they might believe I had been dreaming or that
magic had made me imagine it.

...

672. 'If I don't trust this evidence why should I trust any
evidence ?'
673. Is it not difficult to distinguish between the cases in which
I cannot and those in which I can bard& be mistaken? Is it always
clear to which kind a case belongs? I believe not.
674. There are, however, certain types of case in which I rightly
say I cannot be making a mistake, and Moore has given a few
examples of such cases.I can enumerate various typical cases, but not give any common
characteristic. (N. N. cannot be mistaken about his having flown
from America to England a few days ago. Only if he is mad can
he take anything else to be possible.)
67j. If someone believes that he has flown from America to
England in the last few days, then, I believe, he cannot be making
a mistake.
And just the same if someone says that he is at this moment
sitting at a table and writing.
676. "But even if in such cases I can't be mistaken, isn't it
possible that I am drugged?" If I am and if the drug has taken
away my consciousness, then I am not now zeally talking and

thinking. 1 cannot seriously suppose that I am at this moment
dreaming. Someone who, dreaming, says "I am dreaming", even
if he speaks audibly in doing so, is no more right than if he said
in his dream "it is raining", while it was in fact raining. Even if
his dream were actually connected with the noise of the rain.

